 Tribunal's decision to put Philippines in "awkward position" with China: Duterte



MANILA, June 30 (Xinhua) -- The newly-minted Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Thursday that an arbitral tribunal's decision on the South China Sea disputes, even if favorable to the Philippines, would put his country in an awkward position with China.
The Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague said on Wednesday that an arbitral tribunal, established at the unilateral request of the Philippines, would issue the final "award" on July 12.
While the decision on the arbitration case might be favorable to the Philippines, "it would also put the country in an awkward position especially with China (in terms of relations)," Duterte said at the first meeting of his cabinet at the presidential palace after his inauguration earlier in the day.
Duterte said he wanted to further discuss the arbitration case with the members of the Cabinet Security, Justice and Peace cluster, especially the impact of the forthcoming decision of the tribunal.
"It's a cliffhanger so we should decide right," Duterte said.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said on Wednesday that the tribunal, "established on the basis of illegal conduct and claims of the Philippines," has no jurisdiction over the case and the relevant subject matter, and should not have heard the case or render any award.
"God knows I don't want to declare any fighting with anyone. If we can have peace by just talking I'll be really happy," said Duterte, who had previously said that he was open to talking with China about the maritime disputes.
New Foreign Secretary Perfecto Yasay Jr., during the meeting which was partially televised, said various representatives of foreign groups have urged the country to immediately issue a strong statement if the arbitral decision is favorable to the country.
"I am averse to that idea," Yasay said, stressing the need to study first the "implications and ramifications" of the decision.
Earl Parreno of the Institute of Political and Electoral Reforms said the strategy of the Duterte administration was not to ignore China.
"I think it is not a bad strategy in dealing with China. He should not ignore China and I think he is aware of that," Parreno said, adding that Duterte will exhaust all means to have a stable relationship with China.
Political analyst Benito Lim said Duterte's move would engage instead of antagonizing China.
"Duterte and Yasay have already made their position clear. They want to talk, not fight. To me, that is the best strategy that will open the talks," Lim said. 

