 Duterte voices aversion to presence of foreign troops in Philippines


MANILA, Oct. 25 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte voiced aversion on Tuesday to the presence of foreign troops in the Philippines, saying the country's constitution dictates that the Philippines pursue an independent foreign policy.
At the news conference before departing for Tokyo where he is making a three-day visit, Duterte said his country does not have to "dovetail what the policies of other countries are especially in the matter of stationing of military troops" in the Philippines.
The Philippines has a defense treaty with the United States and defense agreements that allow U.S. troops to conduct joint exercises with Philippine troops. In 2014, Manila inked a defense agreement with Washington granting U.S. troops access to Philippine military bases.
Duterte has earlier said that he wanted to cut the joint military exercises with the U.S. troops and wanted the U.S. military experts out of Mindanao.
"I want an independent policy that I will not kowtow to anybody," he said. 
Related:
Duterte: Don't prepare for any joint war games with U.S. next year 
MANILA, Oct 12 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Wednesday that he has instructed his defense secretary, Delfin Lorenzana, not to make preparations for any joint war games with the U.S. next year.
"I do not want it anymore," Duterte said in a speech at the Philippine coast guard headquarters in Manila.  Full story
Philippines' Duterte questions relevance of military alliances 
MANILA, Oct. 11 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte on Tuesday wondered aloud whether military alliances are still relevant in this day and age, adding he has no plan of scrapping military alliances.
In a speech during an oath-taking ceremony at the Malacanang presidential palace, Duterte said, "I do not mean to cancel or abrogate the military alliances."  Full story
U.S., Philippine marines cut short joint military exercises
MANILA, Oct. 10 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. and Philippine marines have decided to cut short their amphibious landing exercises and live-fire training in the Philippines, ending the games one day ahead of schedule, a spokesman for the Philippine marines said on Monday.
Both sides have agreed to end the exercises on Tuesday instead of Wednesday, Capt. Ryan Lacuesta, spokesman for the Philippine marines, said. Full story
Duterte tells U.S. not to treat Philippines like "doormat" 
MANILA, Oct. 7 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte told the United States on Friday not to treat the Philippines "like a doormat" as he pleaded for "a little respect."
"For as long as I am here do not treat us like a doormat because you'll be sorry," Duterte said in a speech before banana growers in his home city of Davao in southern Philippines.  Full story

