 Xinhua world news summary at 0045 GMT, July 19



ANKARA/ISTANBUL -- A person was shot dead by police at the
Antalya Airport and a deputy mayor was seriously wounded in
Istanbul on Monday, according to witnesses and local media.

The gunfire inside Istanbul's municipal building was adding to a
sense of chaos in a metropolis still smarting from a failed
military coup.(Turkey-Clashes)

- - - -
MANILA -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Monday
his administration will not honor international agreements which
bind the country to limit its greenhouse emissions.

Duterte believed that wealthy countries were "trying to stymie
us with an agreement". (Philippines-Carbon Emissions)

- - - -
ISLAMABAD -- At least seven people were killed and two others
injured when a bomb went off near a vehicle of tribal elders in
Pakistan's northwest Upper Dir district on Monday, officials
said.(Pakistan-Bomb)

- - - -
WASHINGTON -- World Bank President Jim Yong Kim on Monday
announced that American economist Paul Romer will succeed Kaushik
Basu as chief economist and senior vice president of the World
Bank.

Romer, currently a professor at New York University (NYU) and
director of NYU's Marron Institute of Urban Management, wins the
appointment for for his "deep commitment to tackling poverty and
inequity and finding innovative solutions" that the World Bank can
take to scale. (World Bank-Chief Economist)

- - - -
MUNICH -- Four passengers were wounded in an axe attack by a man
aboard a regional train near Wuerzburg in the southern German state
of Bavaria on Monday night, local police have confirmed.

Three of the wounded were in critical condition, German media
Focus Online reported, quoting police sources. The perpetrator was
reportedly shot dead by police. His motive remains
unclear.(Germany-Munich-Attack)

- - - -
LONDON -- British lawmakers on Monday agreed by 472 votes to 117
to replace the country's submarine-based Trident nuclear missile
system, a multi-billion pound project to maintain the country's
military status, after Britain's vote to leave the European
Union.

Theresa May, making her first appearance in parliament as prime
minister, led the debate to pave the way for the building of four
nuclear ballistic submarines, its Trident
system.(Britain-Trident)

- - - -
SEOUL -- The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) on
Tuesday test-fired three short-range ballistic missiles in a show
of force against the decision between Seoul and Washington to
deploy the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) to South
Korean soil.

Yonhap news agency quoted South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff
(JCS) as saying that the DPRK fired off three ballistic missiles,
which are believed to have been a Scud-C type, from the western
region of Hwangju in North Hwanghae province between 5:45 a.m. and
6:05 a.m. local time.(S.Korea-DPRK-Missile) Enditem


