2016-10-23

 "Little brown brother image" of Filipinos stunts Philippines: foreign secretary



MANILA, Oct. 21 (Xinhua) -- The Philippine foreign secretary said on Saturday that the "little brown brother image" has thwarted the Philippines' growth and development, adding that separation from the United States is demanded in pursuing an independent foreign policy.
"It implies breaking away from the debilitating mindset of dependency and subservience - economically and militarily - that have perpetuated our 'little brown brother' image to America, which has stunted our growth and advancement," Perfecto Yasay wrote on his Facebook page.
He parroted the explanation made earlier by President Rodrigo Duterte that Philippines' separation from the U.S. economically and military does not mean severance of relationship or terminating the special bond between the two nations.
Indeed, he said that breaking away from "our closest friend, only military ally and strategic partner would not be in our best national interest" as declared unmistakably by Duterte on his arrival in Davao City from his successful trip to China early Saturday.
"Dismantling this old paradigm to give way to new stronger structures and methods in promoting better understanding and mutually beneficial relationships does not signify destroying alliances, making enemies or creating new barriers towards working together," Yasay explained.
The top Philippine diplomat added, "It simply means letting go of the disguised chains that continue to hold us captive to foreign interests in order to enable our people and duly elected leaders to address our urgent problems and needs in the light of our priorities, experiences and values without undue outside interference."
The separation means enabling the Philippines as a sovereign equal with all nations "in securing world peace not war, forging stronger friendships and not enmity and making our planet a better and safer place for everyone," Yasay said. 
Related:
Philippines committed to restoring defense relations with China: defense secretary
BEIJING, Oct. 21 (Xinhua) -- The Philippines is committed to restoring defense relations with China, said Philippine Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana on Friday.
Lorenzana, who was in Beijing with Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, made the remarks when he met his Chinese counterpart Chang Wanquan in Beijing.Full story

