2016-10-21

 Philippine military tightens security in Duterte's home city



MANILA, Oct. 21 (Xinhua) -- The Armed Forces of the Philippines announced on Friday that it is enhancing the security in Davao City, the home city of President Rodrigo Duterte, including the seas around it due to "terrorism and other threats."
Army Maj. Ezra Balagtey, a spokesperson for the Eastern Mindanao Command, said in a statement that it is formally activating the Joint Task Force Haribon at a naval station in Panacan in Davao City.
Duterte's daughter, Davao City Mayor Inday Sara Duterte Carpio is expected to grace Saturday's ceremony, Balagtey said.
"The JTF Haribon is activated amidst the changing security landscape in Davao City with the emergence of the place as the alternate seat of government and venue for international events," Balagtey said.
Balagtey said the JTF Haribon will be under the operational control of the Eastern Mindanao Command. "Air, land and and sea capabilities will now be integrated to enhance the security of Davao City and its immediate peripheries - to include the sea lanes - from terrorism and other threats," he said.
Aside from securing Davao City, Balagtey added that the task force will also help the Presidential Security Group in securing Duterte and "other very important personalities" that visit the mega city. Duterte often holds cabinet meetings in Davao.
Among the units that is included in the task force are from tactical operations group and the special operations wing of the Philippine Air Force, he said.
Brig. Gen. Ronnie Evangelista, a seasoned combat and skilled counter-terrorism officer, will head the joint task force.
Asked if there are any imminent terror threats, Balatey told Xinhua "This is just to strengthen intelligence coordination among the different units."
Duterte shuttles back and forth in Manila and Davao City since assuming office on June 30.
The president was in Davao when the city was rocked by a blast last Sept. 2 that killed 15 and injured 70 others, prompting authorities to install military checkpoints in and out of the southern city. 

