2016-05-11

 Philippine presumptive president reveals possible members of Cabinet



MANILA, May 11 (Xinhua) -- Philippine presumptive President Rodrigo Duterte has bared some possible members of his Cabinet, including secretaries from the previous administrations and a former military general.
The Davao City mayor, who is leading the partial unofficial election results, told reporters that he has yet to talk to other people whom he would consider to be part of his Official Family.
In dialogues with businessmen prior to the May 9 elections, Duterte said that he would appoint as his peace adviser his former classmate and fellow Davaoeno, Jesus Dureza, who served as the peace adviser and press secretary of former president Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.
He was also eyeing hotel owner Carlos Dominguez to be his secretary at the Department of Finance or the Department of Transportation and Communications.
Duterte was also considering his running mate Senator Alan Peter Cayetano to head the Department of Foreign Affairs after the one year ban for losing candidates. Cayetano has been trailing behind other vice presidential bets Leni Robredo and Ferdinand Marcos Jr. based on partial, unofficial count of the election watchdog.
The incoming president said that Leoncio Evasco, his chief of staff and former member of the leftist New People's Army, would stay beside him. But he did not mention yet the position he would give to Evasco, incumbent mayor of Maribojoc town in central province of Bohol.
Duterte said that former Armed Forces of the Philippines chief of staff Hermogenes Esperon Jr. would also be part of the Cabinet. Esperon also served the Arroyo government as head of the Presidential Management Staff Office.
Presidential Communication Operations Office Secretary Herminio Coloma Jr. said the Aquino administration is prepared for the smooth transition of the government.
"We are ready to cooperate and to work with the incoming administration," he told reporters on Tuesday after administration presidential bet Manuel Roxas II acknowledged his defeat.
President Benigno S. Aquino III's six-year term will end on noon of June 30. 

