2016-07-31

 Philippine military, police directed to be on high alert, neutralize threats to national security



MANILA, July 31 (Xinhua) -- The Philippine military and police have ordered their respective troops to be on high alert and work to neutralize all threats to national security after President Rodrigo Duterte lifted the unilateral declaration of ceasefire with the leftist rebels.
Armed Forces of the Philippines chief of staff General Ricardo Visaya said Sunday the Communist Party of the Philippines-New People's Army-National Democratic Front (CPP-NPA-NDF) has missed "a golden opportunity" to manifest its commitment to the attainment of peace.
He said Duterte's earlier declaration of unilateral truce could have silenced the guns and hastened development, especially in the countryside.
The leftist rebel leadership did not meet the ultimatum issued by Duterte that it declared its own truce until 5:00 p.m. local time on Saturday.
The president made the ultimatum after the NPA rebels attacked a group of militiamen on July 27 in northern province of Davao del Norte, killing one and wounding four others.
He became irked that the ambush took place even if he already declared a truce on July 25 during his first State of the Nation Address.
He said the rebels failed to show good faith.
"I am ordering all our forces to resume their normal mandated tasks and work to neutralize all threats to national security, protect the citizenry, enforce the laws and maintain peace in the land," Visaya said.
PNP Director General Ronald Dela Rosa also issued a separate memorandum to the policemen nationwide withdrawing the suspension of offensive police operation against the rebels.
He directed the law enforcers to be on high alert.
Peace adviser Jesus Dureza, meanwhile, said that with what transpired from July 25 until July 30 when the CPP-NPA-NDF leaders failed to reciprocate the truce, "it is very clear that the president walked the extra mile for peace."
"And no doubt, he will still continue to do so at any given opportunity," he said.
Dureza said that during the cabinet meeting on Monday, he would make "corresponding recommendations" regarding the peace process with the CPP-NPA-NDF.
The leftist rebels have been waging war against the government for over four decades. 

