2016-07-04

 Philippine police chief voices alarm over policemen who tested positive for illegal drugs



MANILA, July 4 (Xinhua) -- Philippine Police Chief Director General Ronald de la Rosa said Monday at least nine policemen have tested positive for illegal drugs out of the 2,405 during a series of test throughout the country.
"This (high percentage of ratio and proportion) is alarming," de la Rosa told a news conference after the flag-raising ceremony at Camp Crame, the main headquarters of the Philippine National Police.
De la Rosa did not reveal the names and ranks of the policemen, saying the nine samples need to undergo confirmatory testing. And once these policemen are confirmed to have used illegal substance they will be charged accordingly, he said.
"I have already said that I have zero tolerance policy on use of illegal drugs and yet nine tested positive for illegal drugs. This is alarming," De la Rosa said. He said the mandatory test will continue.
De la Rosa himself underwent the same test last Friday along with other PNP's top officials. All tested negative, according to the results.
De la Rosa assumed the PNP's top post on Friday, a day after President Rodrigo Duterte was sworn into office as the country's 16th president June 30.
"Surrender in 48 hours or die," de la Rosa said in a speech during the turnover ceremony attended by Duterte Friday, warning police generals and police officers suspected of coddling drug lords.
"We will be relentless in our internal cleansing efforts, w have to eliminate the scallywags from within our ranks," he said. "You. corrupt, abusive, lazy copes and those involved in syndicates, your days are numbered."
Specifically, de la Rosa warned cops in Metro Manila: "Especially Metro Manila cops who brag about recycling shabu' (a slang term for methamphetamine), I am giving you 48 hours to voluntarily surrender to me and tell me everything you know. Otherwise, go on AWOL and become full-time drug lords and fight us."
Duterte won the May 9 elections by a landslide on a platform of stamping out illegal drugs, cracking down on criminals and getting rid of corruption in government.

