 Xinhua world news summary at 1530 GMT, Sept. 5



HANGZHOU -- The 11th summit of the Group of 20 (G20) major
economies concluded here on Monday, reaching extensive consensus on
pursuing innovative, invigorated, interconnected and inclusive
world economic growth.

"Held at a critical time for world economic growth and the
transformation of G20, the Hangzhou summit attracted wide attention
from the whole world and carried high expectations," Xi said at a
press conference after the summit concluded.
(China-G20-Conclusion)

- - - -
LONDON -- Britain has appointed its ambassador to Iran for the
first time since 2011, in a further sign of warming up of bilateral
relations between the countries.

A statement issued by the British Foreign Office on Monday said
that Nicholas Hopton, previously British Charge d'affaires in
Tehran, has been upgraded to ambassador. (China-US-Britain
Summit)

- - - -
PARIS -- Thousands of Chinese living in France marched Sunday in
Paris to protest against insecurity and crimes targeting Chinese
after a Chinese textile designer died after being attacked last
month in Paris suburbs.

Police data showed about 15,000 people attended the rally on
Sunday, the largest gathering of Chinese community since 2012.
(France-Chinese-Protest)

- - - -
KABUL -- Up to 24 people have been confirmed dead and 91 others
injured in the twin suicide blasts that went off near Afghan
defense ministry on Monday, spokesman for Public Health Ministry,
Ismael Kawusi said.

"Based on latest information collected from concerned sources
and hospitals, a total of 24 people including civilians and
security personnel were killed and 91 others injured in the twin
blasts that hit near defense ministry today afternoon," Kawusi told
Xinhua. (Afghanistan-Attack)

- - - -
MANILA -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte proclaimed on
Monday a state of national emergency for the Philippines on account
of lawless violence, a Malacanang presidential palace said in a
statement.

Presidential Communications Office Assistant Secretary Kristian
Ablan told reporters that "the proclamation technically took effect
today and remains in force until lifted by the president."
(Philippines-National Emergency) Enditem


