2016-10-22

 Xinhua China-related world news summary at 1130 GMT, Oct. 22



CAM RANH -- A Chinese naval fleet arrived in Cam Ranh Port in
central Vietnam on Saturday for a five-day visit to the country to
promote military ties between the two sides.

The 23rd Chinese naval escort task force comprises Xiangtan,
Zhoushan and Chaohu of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA)
Navy. The visit to Vietnam is the last stop of the fleet on their
way home after completing escort missions in the Gulf of Aden, the
waters off Somali and visiting Myanmar, Malaysia and Cambodia, said
Senior Colonel Wang Hongli, commander of the task force. (Chinese
Naval Fleet-Vietnam Port-Visit)

- - - -
BOGOTA -- The Southern Cultural Industries Market (MICSUR), held
in Bogota on Oct. 17-20, received China for the second time,
allowing the country to promote its cultural creativity and
diversity to Latin American audience.

The event has also brought more value to the current China-Latin
America and Caribbean Year of Cultural Exchange.(Columbia-LatAm
Cultural Fair)

- - - -
LA PAZ -- Bolivian President Evo Morales on Friday highlighted
China's investment and cooperation across various development
projects in Bolivia.

"We don't feel alone. China's presence is felt in the
cooperation and investments that the Asian country carries out (in
Bolivia)," said Morales during a public address in the southern
town of Gran Chaco de Tarija .The president said that Chinese loans
to Bolivia had no conditions attached, unlike those seen in the
past from the United States and international organizations.
(Bolivia-China-Ties)

- - - -
MANILA -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Saturday
that his four-day visit to China "signaled a turning point" in
diplomatic relations between the two Asian countries.

"My state visit to China signaled a turning point in our shared
history and showed that both countries are fully capable of working
together for mutual beneficial cooperation even as we remain
committed to settle disputes peacefully, in full adherence of
international law," Duterte said in a speech in Davao City upon
arrival from Beijing.(Philippines-China) Enditem


