2016-08-17

 Philippine president implicates female senator in illegal drugs



MANILA, Aug. 17 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte on Wednesday implicated a female senator in illegal drugs, accusing the unnamed senator of using drug money to finance her campaign during the May elections.
In a speech before policemen at the main headquarters of the Philippine National Police in Quezon City, Duterte also accused the woman senator, whom he did not name, of adultery.
"Here's a senator complaining. One day I will tell you that her driver himself, who was her lover, was the one collecting money for her during the campaign," Duterte said.
He called the lawmaker an "immoral woman" who flaunts her alleged illicit relationship with a married driver. "As far as the wife of the driver was concerned, it's adultery," he said.
"Here is a woman who funded the house of her lover and yet we do not say any complaint about her. Those money came readily from her," he added.
But Duterte later clarified that he was unsure whether the driver gave the money he collected to the woman senator. "But in fairness, I would never say here that the driver gave the money to her. But by the looks of it she has it."
He said the senator has no moral authority to criticize the spate of killings happening in the country, victimizing people who are suspected to be involved in illegal drugs.
He blasted the senator for "political posturing," adding "you yourself has a very sordid personal and official life."
Last week, Duterte vowed to "destroy in public" a woman government official whom he described as a "human rights stalwart".
Very much bothered by the drug menace affecting the country, the president said there are about 3.7 million Filipinos who are dependent in drugs roaming around the country, preying on children and youths.
"Now, we are seeing our country devastated by drugs. It has not only affected millions but a lot of them no longer viable as human beings in the planet," he said.
Duterte has intensified his election campaign to "kill" illegal drug protectors, users and pushers. So far, he has implicated almost 200 people in the so-called "name-and-shame" campaign, including judges, policemen and local officials.
One of the lawmakers who met with Duterte in the Malacanang presidential palace on Monday told reporters that Duterte is set to release a new list of politicians allegedly involved in the illegal drug trade. It was not clear if the name of the female senator is included in the forthcoming list.
Philippine media have tallied nearly 700 vigilante-type killings related to illicit drugs since Duterte assumed the presidency in June.
Local reporters sought the reaction of Senator Leila de Lima, a known critic of Duterte, if she felt alluded to by Duterte's statement. She said she was surprised by Duterte's statement "but I won't be cowed."
"I don't want to dignify that. To me t's very foul. It's character assassination. That is a very clear case of character assassination and I do not expect the president to do that," she said.
"I hope (Duterte verifies) his facts and sources. He needs to double check the facts. I also hope that he announces the sources of this information." 

