2016-10-02

 Xinhua world news summary at 1530 GMT, Oct. 2



MANILA -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said Sunday that
he would order a review of the Enhanced Defense Cooperation
Agreement (EDCA), a defense pact that Washington and Manila signed
in 2014.

Duterte made the remarks at a local festival in Bacolod City in
the central Philippines. (Philippines-Duterte)

- - - -
LONDON -- British Prime Minister Theresa May says she will
formally begin the Brexit process by the end of March 2017, in an
interview with the BBC.

Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show, she did not give an exact date
beyond saying "by the end of March" for triggering Article 50 in
the Lisbon treaty of the EU needed by a member state to exit the
bloc. (Britain-PM-Brexit)

- - - -
MADRID -- A total of 90 people were confirmed as injured, with
five in a serious condition, following a gas explosion in a
cafeteria in the town of Velez-Malaga, southern Spain, on Saturday
night.

Spanish TV network RTVE reports the five people who were
seriously injured were taken to hospital in Velez-Malaga and the
city of Malaga. None of the lives of the injured are thought to be
in danger. (Spain-Gas Explosion)

- - - -
CHICAGO -- Chinese Consul General in Chicago presented awards
for students who have achieved excellence in their academic study
in a ceremony held Saturday in the University of Chicago.

While addressing the ceremony, Chinese Consul General in Chicago
Hong Lei spoke highly of the diligence and innovation of Chinese
students and urged them to go on studying hard to attain higher
achievements. (US-Chinese Students-Government Award)

- - - -
ADDIS ABABA -- Violence disrupted celebration of the annual
Irecha (thanksgiving) festival on Sunday in Oromia Regional Sate of
Ethiopia, local media reported on Sunday.

The Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation (EBC), citing a statement
from the Government Communication Affairs Office, reported that the
celebration could not be completed as planned due to a pre-planned
act of violence by 'forces of violence'. (Ethiopia-Stampede)
Enditem


