2016-09-04

 Xinhua world news summary at 1530 GMT, Sept. 4



HANGZHOU, China -- U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Sunday
spoke highly of the ratification of the landmark Paris climate
change agreement by China and the United States, calling for
accelerated efforts from other countries to join the ambitious
pact.

"With China and the United States making this historic step, we
now have 26 parties in the UNFCCC (U.N. Framework Convention on
Climate Change Convention) and 39 percent of global greenhouse gas
emissions accounted for," Ban said at a press conference on the
sidelines of the 11th Group of 20 (G20) summit in this eastern
Chinese city. (UN-Climate Change Deal)

- - - -
HANGZHOU -- U.S. President Barack Obama and British Prime
Minister Theresa May, at their first meeting since the latter's
assumption of office, downplayed concerns about bilateral trade
following Britain's decision to leave the European Union (EU).

"The bottom line is we don't have a stronger partner in the
world than the United Kingdom," said Obama at the meeting, which
took place in this eastern Chinese city on the sidelines of the
11th Group of 20 (G20) summit. (China-US-Britain Summit)

- - - -
BEIJING -- Chinese President Xi Jinping on Sunday sent a message
of condolences to Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte over a
terrorist bombing in Southern Philippines' Davao City, reiterating
China's opposition to "terrorism in all forms."

In the message, Xi said he was shocked by the terrorist attack
in Davao City, which killed at least 14 people and wounded almost
70 others on Friday night. (China-Philippines-Condolences)

- - - -
MANILA -- The Philippine government is not ruling out other
possible groups besides Abu Sayyaf, which could be behind a deadly
explosion in southern city of Davao, a senior government official
said Sunday.

Presidential Communications Office Secretary Martin Andanar said
it could not be denied that the government has enemies in the drug
lords. (Philippines-Terror Bombing) Enditem


