2016-06-21

 Duterte vows to implement recommendations of business sector under his watch



MANILA, June 21 (Xinhua) -- Incoming Philippine President-elect Rodrigo Duterte vowed to implement the recommendations of the business community on how to make the economy more competitive during his six-year term of office which starts on June 30.
"I assure you we will study and review it and for now I would say I see nothing wrong with this. These are all doable. It's a matter of just doing it and implement it right away," Duterte told a business forum in southern Philippine Davao City.
Duterte, who will be sworn into office on June 30, reiterated that he will stamp out corruption and stressed the importance of law and order in order to rev up the economy.
"Corruption must stop. It makes me sick," he told the businessmen, warning that he will go after corrupt government officials, criminals and drug lords. "I will not allow narco-politics in this country," he said.
"There can never be progress and development without law and order," Duterte said.
Businessmen flew to Davao City to attend the two-day business forum that started Monday. The businessmen came up with a 10-point policy recommendations that can help Duterte pursue his own vision of the economy under his six-year-term. Carlos Dominguez, Duterte's finance secretary, said the recommendations "represent the best thinking of the (business) sector."
Duterte and his economic team initiated the consultations to ensure a smooth-sailing relationship with the sector vital in sustaining the growth of the economy and the investment climate.
"The nation needs a vision that all Filipinos here and abroad can identify with. A mission and a masterplan that is not just a medium-term plan the we together can implement," said George Barcelon, president of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Barcelon said the businessmen "analysed, dissected and argued" on the 10-point socio-economic program of the Duterte administration during the two-day meeting.
"At the end of the day we came to a consensus of recommendations," he said. "We hope that this (set of recommendations) will guide our country to better days. We look forward to you as a captain to call us to be on board."
The businessmen crafted a "masterplan" that includes the need to implement a comprehensive tax reform package, to implement a national identification system, automation of business permits and licensing systems, improve internet and telecommunication services and improve the delivery of support systems to agriculture sector.
The businessmen also stressed the need to implement responsible mining, the need to map out a national strategy for industries and the need to improve transport networks and connectivity across the archipelagic country. Moreover, they also stressed the need to review conditional cash transfer program and reduce bottlenecks in Public-Private Partnership programs and respect the sanctity of contracts. 

