 Opinion: Moving beyond South China Sea dispute to Sino-Philippine win-win cooperation





The national flag of the Philippines is raised up at the Olympic Village in Beijing, China, Aug. 4, 2008. (Xinhua/Liu Dawei)

by Xinhua writer Luo Jun

BEIJING, May 9 (Xinhua) -- For whoever wins the Philippine general election on Monday, improving the people's well-being is undoubtedly a top priority, and that effort would be unnecessarily harder without a healthy relationship with China.



Philippine Presidential candidate and Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte speaks to his supporters during a grand campaign rally in Manila, capital of the Philippines, on May 7, 2016. (Xinhua/Rouelle Umali)

As the world's second largest economy, and the No. 1 trade partner to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which the Philippines is an important member, China has made remarkable contributions to the development of the dynamic region, consisting of mostly emerging economies.

With the China-proposed Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) breaking ground with new projects, and the gradual gathering of momentum by the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road program, part of China's Belt and Road Initiative, promising new opportunities are presented for regional countries including the Philippines.



File photo taken on Nov. 3, 2015 shows a bullet train running through a bridge on the Lanzhou-Xinjiang high-speed railway, northwest China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. (Xinhua/Cai Zengle)

Unfortunately, over the past six years, under President Benigno Aquino's rule, the Southeast Asian country has increasingly fallen under the influence of warmongers in Washington and Tokyo, while achieving little in real benefits and progress for its people.



Philippine President Benigno Aquino III (R) poses for a photo with U.S. President Barack Obama before the start of the 23rd APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Manila, the Philippines, Nov. 19, 2015. (Xinhua Photo)

Respectively seeking "re-balance towards the Asia-Pacific," a strategy widely interpreted as a move to contain a prospering China, and the expansion of military power, the United States and Japan have made a use of unresolved territorial disputes in the South China Sea as a perfect excuse to create tension and insert their meddling hands.

The Philippines' role in the once peaceful region, in the eyes of hawkish politicians in Washington and right-wing extremists in Tokyo, is clearly just a pawn, as they are only interested in enthusiastically pushing for military bases and arms sales to the country.



Activists protest with slogans as one of them holds a picture of the USS Guardian during a rally near the U.S. Embassy in Manila, the Philippines, Jan. 21, 2013. (Xinhua/Rouelle Umali)

Aquino was naive to believe that he could use Washington and Tokyo's influence to gain an upper hand over China in the South China Sea, as China is a sincere partner of dialogue and cooperation in the region. Meanwhile, the meddlers will be delighted to see grudges and confrontations, even though they are at the cost of the Filipinos.

It was also a serious strategic misjudgment for Aquino to distract ASEAN from focusing on economic and social development with bilateral disputes, which creates unnecessary division and hinders the regional bloc's essential task.

Manila could have its voice better heard through a strong and independent ASEAN, while being a puppet of Uncle Sam and trying to manipulate the bloc will definitely be unhelpful.



Aerial photo taken on Sept. 19, 2015 shows the Waigaoqiao container pier of the Shanghai free trade zone (FTZ) in Shanghai, east China. (Xinhua/Pei Xin)

With solid plans like the Belt and Road Initiative and the AIIB aimed at regional cooperation, development and integration, China has proved by action its true aspiration for win-win cooperation and common prosperity.

It is highly advisable for the new administration in Manila to see clearly who is their true friend, and to join Beijing in dialogue and cooperation to tackle their disagreement, thus safeguarding peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific.

