2016-10-21

 Full Text: Joint Statement of China and the Philippines



BEIJING, Oct. 21 (Xinhua) -- The following is a joint statement released by China and the Philippines on Friday:
JOINT STATEMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
Beijing, 21 October 2016
1. At the invitation of H.E. President Xi Jinping of the People's Republic of China, H.E. President Rodrigo Roa Duterte of the Republic of the Philippines undertook a state visit to China from 18 to 21 October 2016.
2. During the visit, President Xi Jinping and President Rodrigo Roa Duterte had a fruitful meeting in an amicable and friendly atmosphere and conducted in-depth exchanges on bilateral relations as well as international and regional issues of shared interest. H.E. Li Keqiang, Premier of the State Council, and H.E. Zhang Dejiang, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, met with President Rodrigo Roa Duterte. H.E. Zhang Gaoli, Vice Premier of the State Council, and President Rodrigo Roa Duterte also attended the opening ceremony of China-Philippines Economic and Investment Forum and delivered remarks.
3. Both sides acknowledge the centuries-old bonds of friendship of the two peoples. Both sides agree that the mutual understanding and friendship of the two peoples are important. Both sides will make concerted efforts to cement the traditional friendship of the two peoples.
4. Both sides agree that since the establishment of diplomatic relations, China-Philippines relations have enjoyed smooth development and remarkable progress in many areas of cooperation which have benefited both countries and peoples.
5. Both sides commit to further enrich China-Philippines bilateral relations, founded on mutual respect, sincerity, equality and mutual benefit, which is conducive to regional peace, stability and prosperity.
6. Both sides reaffirm the principles contained in the China-Philippines Joint Communique of 1975 and other documents, whose principles include, among others, the principle of the peaceful settlement of all disputes and the Philippines' adherence to the One-China Policy.
7. Both sides affirm their partnership and their common aspiration to achieve sustainable development and inclusive growth that will benefit the peoples of both countries. Both sides agree that this is a milestone visit which will infuse new energy to bring tangible benefits to the peoples of the two countries. Both sides will work together to pursue the sound and stable development of the strategic and cooperative relationship for peace and development.
8. Both sides acknowledge the great importance of maintaining high-level exchanges in promoting the all-around development of bilateral relations.
9. Both sides welcome the signing during the visit of various agreements and Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), as listed in the Annex.
10. Both sides express interest in finalizing agreements and MOUs in such areas as education, finance, customs and sports.
11. Both sides affirm the importance of existing China-Philippines bilateral dialogue mechanisms in enhancing understanding, broadening cooperation and striving for a stronger relationship. Both sides agree to resume the Foreign Ministry Consultations, Consular Consultations, Joint Commission on Economic and Trade Cooperation, Annual Defense Security Talks, Joint Committee on Agriculture, Joint Committee on Science and Technology, and other bilateral dialogue mechanisms.
12. Both sides will encourage exchange of visits of high-ranking governmental delegations and leaders at the local level, legislative organs, political parties, and civil organizations, and increase interactions and communications.
13. The Philippines welcomes China's proposal to open a Consulate-General of the People's Republic of China in Davao in due course. Proper arrangements for the diplomatic premises in both countries will be made in the spirit of the 1975 Joint Communique, on the basis of international practice and reciprocity, with priority for the most immediate concerns.
14. Realizing that coordinated action is necessary to combat transnational crimes, the two countries' relevant agencies, subject to mutually agreed arrangements, will enhance cooperation and communication to combat transnational crimes, including telecommunications fraud, on-line fraud, cybercrimes, drug trafficking, trafficking in persons and wildlife trafficking.
15. Both sides oppose violent extremism and terrorism in all forms and will cooperate in the fields of information exchange, capacity building, among others, in order to jointly prevent and address the threat of violent extremism and terrorism.
16. China understands and supports Philippine Government's efforts in fighting against illicit drugs. Realizing that the problem of illicit drugs poses severe threats to the health, safety and welfare of the peoples of both countries, both sides agree to enhance exchange of intelligence, know-how and technology sharing on fighting against drug crimes, preventive education and rehabilitation facilities.
17. To further strengthen the efforts to fight against illicit drugs, both sides agree to establish operation mechanism for joint investigation on special cases and intelligence collection purposes. The Philippines thanks China for its offer of assistance in personnel training and donation of drug detection, seizure, and testing equipment to aid in the fight against illicit drugs.
18. Both sides commit to enhance cooperation between their respective Coast Guards, to address maritime emergency incidents, as well as humanitarian and environmental concerns in the South China Sea, such as safety of lives and property at sea and the protection and preservation of the marine environment, in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law including the 1982 UNCLOS.
19. Both sides agree to continue discussions with a view to signing a bilateral agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons.
20. Both sides agree that bilateral defense and military cooperation are important components of bilateral relations. To enhance mutual trust, both sides agree to implement the China-Philippines MOU on Defense Cooperation, through exchanges and cooperation in areas of humanitarian assistance and disaster alleviation and peacekeeping operations.
21. Both sides agree that bilateral economic cooperation remains strong, but has room for growth. Both sides commit to enhance economic relations in the priority sectors of the two countries by leveraging their complementarity and continuously promoting trade, investment and economic cooperation, through the activities identified under the MOU on Strengthening Bilateral Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation.
22. Both sides acknowledge the mutual economic and social benefits gained from the Five Year Development Program for Trade and Economic Cooperation (2011-2016), and announced their commitment to its renewal through the Memorandum of Understanding on the Formulation of the Development Program for Economic Cooperation.
23. Both sides identify poverty alleviation as their shared aspiration, and agree to exchange best practices and cooperate in projects in this regard.
24. Both sides express willingness to jointly undertake practical cooperation including infrastructure investment, infrastructure project construction and industrial production capacity. Both sides agree that infrastructure cooperation which are jointly undertaken will be subject to proper procurement process, transparency and in compliance with relevant domestic laws and regulations and international practices.
25. Both sides will develop financial cooperation including in areas such as concessional loans, preferential buyer's credit, bonds issuance, loans, investments, securities, and others as mutually agreed upon including special loans for development. Both sides will strengthen cooperation in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and other multilateral and regional development banks.
26. Both sides express willingness to expand the local currency settlement of bilateral trade and investment, and to coordinate to actively promote the regional financial cooperation which includes the multilateralization of Chiang Mai Initiative (CMIM) and bilateral swap arrangements (BSA). China welcomes the interest of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) in participating in the Chinese Interbank Bond Market.
27. Both sides commit to expand cooperation in agriculture, particularly in such areas as (i) agricultural technology and infrastructure;(ii) agricultural trade;(iii) irrigation;(iv) climate change adaption and mitigation and (v) compliance with animal and plant sanitary standards.
28. Both sides agree to strengthen cooperation on animal and plant inspection and quarantine. The Philippines welcomes China's announcement to restore permits of relevant Philippine enterprises that export bananas and pineapples to China, and continue to import vapor heat treated mangoes which were packed in facilities that comply with standards set by China.
29. Both sides will undertake joint efforts to promote cooperation in the fields of high quality hybrid rice seeds, agriculture infrastructure, agricultural machinery, further develop the role of the Sino-Phil Center for Agricultural Technology, and other mutually agreed upon areas. China commits support for the Philippines' effort to improve its food production capacity, training of agricultural technical professionals, and agricultural and fisheries industry development and capacity building, subject to domestic laws.
30. China expresses readiness to support Philippine requests for assistance under the framework of the ASEAN Plus Three Emergency Rice Reserve (APTERR) in times of emergency. 
31. China expresses readiness to provide assistance to the Philippines in building scientific research industrial system and in science and technology training. Both sides are willing to explore the possibility of jointly building technology transfer centers, joint laboratories, and science and technology resources sharing platforms.
32. Recognizing the growing two-way tourist arrivals in the past few years and noting momentum that will be driven by the "ASEAN-China Year of Tourism" in 2017, both sides agree to set the goal of intensifying tourism cooperation. Both sides will encourage their citizens to travel to each other's country, explore the possible increase in capacity entitlements in air services, and encourage airlines to open new flights between Philippine cities, including Davao City and other cities in Visayas and Mindanao, and Chinese cities, which will contribute to the realization of this objective.
33. Both sides encourage the universities of the two countries to promote meaningful exchanges in the field of research and innovation and to strengthen academic exchanges and the model of university-research-industry communications and cooperation. China expresses readiness to increase allocation of Chinese Government Scholarship for the Philippines in the areas of science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
34. Both sides agree to encourage mutual visits of media personnel, exchange of media products, cooperation in facilities, technologies and training between Chinese media and Philippine media including the People' s Broadcasting Corporation. The competent media authority of China is willing to enhance exchanges and cooperation with the Presidential Communication Office of the Philippines.
35. Both sides express interest in increasing twinning agreements between their cities and provinces, noting that these arrangements will encourage mutual understanding between their peoples and tap cooperation potentials at the local level.
36. Both sides agree to cooperate in emergency assistance and disaster relief.
37. Both sides reaffirm the importance of further implementing the "Executive Program of Cultural Agreement between the Philippines and China, 2015-2018" and encouraged their cultural institutions and groups to increase exchange of visits. Both sides will positively consider setting up their respective culture centers in each other's country.
38. Both sides attach importance to people-to-people exchanges between the two countries, noting that 2017 marks 600 years of friendly contacts between the Sultanate of Sulu and China, and the Philippines and China expressed interest in holding relevant commemorative activities.
39. Both sides will explore other areas of bilateral cooperation including in information technology, health, customs cooperation, research and development, education, and other fields that will be mutually beneficial to both countries.
40.Both sides exchange views on issues regarding the South China Sea. Both sides affirm that contentious issues are not the sum total of the China-Philippines bilateral relationship. Both sides exchange views on the importance of handling the disputes in the South China Sea in an appropriate manner. Both sides also reaffirm the importance of maintaining and promoting peace and stability, freedom of navigation in and over-flight above the South China Sea, addressing their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or use of force, through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly concerned, in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and the 1982 UNCLOS.
41. Both sides recall the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) and the Joint Statement of the Foreign Ministers of ASEAN Member States and China on the Full and Effective Implementation of the DOC adopted in Vientiane on 25 July 2016. Both sides commit to the full and effective implementation of DOC in its entirety, and work substantively toward the early conclusion of a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) based on consensus.
42. Both sides agree to continue discussions on confidence-building measures to increase mutual trust and confidence and to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities in the South China Sea that would complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability. In this regard, in addition to and without prejudice to other mechanisms, a bilateral consultation mechanism can be useful, which will meet regularly on current and other issues of concern to either side on the South China Sea. Both sides also agree to explore other areas of cooperation.
43. China expresses support for the Philippines' chairmanship of ASEAN in 2017. Both sides express satisfaction with the growth of ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations over the past 25 years and affirmed their commitment to the principle of ASEAN centrality in the evolving regional architecture. China affirms support for ASEAN integration, ASEAN Community Building, as well as ASEAN's efforts in realizing ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together.
44. Both sides affirm their continued cooperation in UN, ASEAN Regional Forum, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Asia-Europe Meeting, World Trade Organization, UN Climate Change Conference and other regional and multilateral organizations.
45. Both sides reaffirm adherence to sovereign equality, non-intervention, and non-interference enshrined in the UN Charter and reiterate their common commitment for the protection and promotion of human rights through dialogue and cooperation in light of the core human rights instruments to which both countries are parties to.
46. Both sides support the enhancement of the UN's role through necessary and reasonable reforms. Both sides held that pushing for the implementation of development issues, upholding the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries, enhancing the voice and representation of developing countries in international affairs should be the priorities in the reform of the UN, including the Security Council, and increasing the role of developing countries in UN decision-making.
47. President Rodrigo Roa Duterte expressed appreciation for the warm welcome extended by the Chinese side. President Rodrigo Roa Duterte invited President Xi Jinping to visit the Philippines at a convenient time. President Xi Jinping accepted the invitation with pleasure. President Rodrigo Roa Duterte also said that he looked forward to welcoming Chinese leaders to the ASEAN and Related Summits in 2017.
ANNEX
List of Signed Cooperation Documents
1. Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines
2. Memorandum of Understanding between the National Development and Reform Commission of the People's Republic of China and the National Economic and Development Authority of the Republic of the Philippines for Developing Cooperation on Production Capacity and Investment
3. Memorandum of Understanding between the National Development and Reform Commission of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Transportation and the Department of Public Works and Highways of the Republic of the Philippines on Transportation Infrastructure Cooperation Project List
4. Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Commerce of the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Trade and Industry of the Republic of the Philippines on Strengthening Bilateral Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation
5. Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China and the National Economic and Development Authority of the Republic of the Philippines on Formulation of the Development Program for Economic Cooperation
6. Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Finance of the Republic of the Philippines on Supporting the Conduct of Feasibility Studies for Major Projects
7. Action Plan on Agricultural Cooperation between the Ministry of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Agriculture of the Republic of the Philippines 2017-2019
8. Memorandum of Agreement between the State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China and the Presidential Communications Operations Office of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines on News, Information Exchange, Training and for other Purposes
9. Memorandum of Understanding between the General Administration of Quality Supervision Inspection and Quarantine of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Agriculture of the Republic of the Philippines on Cooperation of Animal and Plant Inspection and Quarantine
10. Memorandum of Understanding between the China Coast Guard and the Philippine Coast Guard on the Establishment of a Joint Coast Guard Committee on Maritime Cooperation
11. Implementation Program of the Memorandum of Understanding on Tourism Cooperation between the National Tourism Administration of the People's Republic of China and the Department of Tourism of the Republic of the Philippines 2017-2022
12. Protocol on Cooperation between the Narcotics Control Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security of the People's Republic of China and the Philippines Drug Enforcement Agency
13. Memorandum of Understanding on Financing Cooperation between the Export-Import Bank of China and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, represented by the Department of Finance

