 Philippine incoming gov't urged to drop defense pact with U.S.



MANILA, June 11 (Xinhua) -- A Philippine columnist on Saturday
called on the incoming Philippine government to drop a defense pact
between the Philippines and the United States, arguing it was
reducing the country into one big U.S. military base.

"For as long as we have foreign military bases on our soil, the
country can never formulate its own independent foreign policy,"
Rod Kapunan wrote in an article published on Saturday, calling the
foreign policy of outgoing Benigno Aquino's government "a carbon
copy of the U.S. policy for the Asia-Pacific region."

Manila and Washington signed the Enhanced Defense Cooperation
Agreement in 2014, which allows the U.S. troops to build facilities
to store equipment in the Philippines, in addition to giving broad
access to Philippine military bases.

"As a lawyer, (incoming President Rodrigo) Duterte could see the
implication in allowing the reinstallation of the U.S. bases,"
Kapunan wrote in an English newspaper the Standard.

He called on Duterte to drop the defense pact, which he said
would be used as an example by future administrations to sign
agreements that would allow other countries to establish their own
military bases in the Philippines.

He slammed the Aquino administration for bringing the dispute
with China in the South China Sea to the Permanent Court of
Arbitration in The Hague, saying it would give the United States
the leverage to continue "its provocative patrol in the South China
Sea."

Kapunan pointed out that the defense pact has been unduly
stretched by the United States to allow it to conduct regular naval
patrol and reconnaissance flight in the disputed waters, and that
invoking freedom of navigation to conduct regular naval patrol
would lose its viability if the Philippines decides to scrap the
pact.

"Nobody would believe that its continued patrol in the area is
to secure the freedom of navigation. Rather, the whole military
infrastructure it built would be exposed as a facade to contain
China," Kapunan wrote. Enditem


