2016-06-30

 Philippines' new vice president assumes office



MANILA, June 30 (Xinhua) -- The Philippines' new vice president Leni Robredo took her oath of office on Thursday.
The 52-year-old politician was sworn into office as the country's 14th vice president in Quezon City where she will hold office for a six-year term.
In her inaugural speech, she called for unity and promised to bring prosperity to the Filipinos, especially the poor.
Hours after her inauguration, the country's new president Rodrigo Duterte assumed office as the Philippines' 16th president at the presidential palace Malacanang.
Robredo defeated five other vice presidential bets in the May election, who ran under a different party from Duterte. 
Related:
Spotlight: Philippines' incoming president promises to crush criminality, corruption, poverty
MANILA, June 29 (Xinhua) -- Rodrigo Duterte will take his oath of office on Thursday as the Philippines' 16th president.
On the campaign trail, the tough-talking former mayor from southern Philippines' Davao City has promised to "kill" drug lords and shame corrupt government officials and policemen suspected of colluding with criminals. Full story 
Philippine President-elect Duterte draws flak for comments on media killings
MANILA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President-elect Rodrigo Duterte caused a social media storm on Wednesday when he trivialized media killings in the country by saying that journalists are paid hacks and resort to irresponsible reporting.
"It's not because you're a journalist you're exempted from assassination if you're a son of a bitch," Duterte told a press conference in Davao City Tuesday night, adding that journalists get killed because they take bribes and takes sides or excessively attack people. Full story 
Philippine president to face charges after term ends: congressman
MANILA, May 16 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Benigno S. Aquino III will face charges once he steps down from office, a lawmaker warned Monday.
Bayan Muna party-list Representative Carlos Isagani Zarate said Aquino, along with Budget Secretary Florencio Abad and other members of his cabinet, would face complaints in relation to the Disbursement Acceleration Program (DAP), which was declared by the Supreme Court as unconstitutional in 2014. Full story 

