2016-09-03

 Duterte declares "state of lawlessness" in S. Philippines after explosion



The staff from the Philippine National Police (PNP-SOCO) investigate after an explosion at a market in Davao Province, the Philippines, Sept. 3, 2016. At least 10 people have been confirmed dead and scores others wounded in an explosion in the hometown of Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte on Friday night, officials said on Saturday, amid fears the toll could further rise. (Xinhua/STRINGE)
MANILA, Sept. 3 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte declared Saturday "state of lawlessness" in southern island of Mindanao following a deadly attack allegedly perpetrated by the Abu Sayyaf Group in Davao City.
In an interview with reporters, Duterte said his declaration of state of lawlessness "would require nationwide, well-coordinated efforts of the military and the police."
He clarified that it is not a declaration of martial law.
"I have this duty to protect the country. I have this duty to keep intact the integrity of the nation," the president said.
Death toll from the explosion reached 14, while over 70 were injured.
In a separate statement, Presidential Spokesperson Ernesto Abella said the president's declaration of a state of lawlessness is rooted in Article VII Section 18 of the Constitution.
The declaration is limited such that he can only call out the armed forces to suppress the lawless violence, Abella said, adding that there was no suspension of the writ of habeas corpus.
"It is a different case from the existence of invasion or rebellion. Only if there is invasion or rebellion, and when public safety requires it, can he suspend the writ of habeas corpus or declare martial law," he explained.
According to Interior and Local Government Secretary Mike Sueno, the Abu Sayyaf Group has claimed responsibility for the attack at the Davao night market late Friday night.
Duterte came from Davao City and his daughter and son are the mayor and vice-mayor, respectively, of the city.
Prior to the attack, the military has been conducting intensified operation against the bandits in southern province of Sulu after they beheaded a Filipino hostage.
Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said he has directed all commands of the Armed Forces of the Philippines "to be on high alert especially in urban centers for possible other terroristic act attempts by this group."
The Eastern Command in Davao city has been directed to assist the Philippine National Police in maintaining peace and order in Davao City and in the apprehension of the perpetrators, he said.
"They will also aid in gathering intelligence information and in conducting investigations to get to the bottom of this unfortunate incident," he added. 

