 People's Daily says China will never allow U.S. to run amok in South China Sea



BEIJING, Oct. 24 (Xinhua) -- The People's Daily, an official newspaper of the Communist Party of China, has criticized a U.S. warship's intrusion into Chinese territorial waters in the South China Sea, saying such action will only speed up the decline of U.S. influence.
The newspaper on Sunday published an article to denounce USS Decatur's intrusion into Chinese territorial waters near Xisha Islands on Friday.
The Chinese Defense Ministry branded the intrusion as an "illegal and provocative" move. The Chinese Foreign Ministry also urged the United States to stop "irresponsible" and "provocative" actions which go against China's sovereignty and maritime interests.
The U.S. destroyer's move is a serious violation of China's sovereignty and international law. It also disrupted peace, safety and order on the sea, the article said.
The intrusion happened as Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte was in China for a visit to China, during which a series of cooperative agreements were signed.
At a time when countries on the South China Sea issue are improving relations, and a proper solution of the issue has shown encouraging momentum, the messing up by a U.S. destroyer has revealed clearly that Washington cannot accept a peaceful and stable South China Sea, the article said.
"The U.S. feels a little anxious over China's sound ties with the Philippines," Duterte said in Beijing.
U.S. hegemony with provocative actions will only result in the accelerated decline of its global influence, the article read.
Washington will gain influence in the Asia-Pacific only by taking active part in promoting common development in the region, it said. "The outdated hegemonic mentality is not compatible with the regional countries' pursue of peace, cooperation and development."
In recent years, the United States has been messing up in the South China Sea under the excuse of "freedom of navigation." It has also been seeking to sow discord between China and the Philippines.
"Flexing military muscles does not make a country super power, let alone creating discord and muddying waters in the South China Sea," the article said.
The Philippines' choice to adjust its diplomatic policies and reinforce cooperation with China also proves that an unjust cause committed by the U.S. finds little support, it said.
Also, China is determined to safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity. "China will ... fight for every inch of its territory within its sovereignty," the article stressed.
It warned that U.S. hegemony will only prompt China to strengthen defense and its resolution to improve capacity to safeguard its own interests.
The Chinese military will safeguard national sovereignty and security by beefing up patrols and optimizing its defensive capabilities. "China will never allow the United States to run amok in the South China Sea, which is a major issue of principle," the article concluded. 

