 Feature: Unknown painter of Duterte's official portrait slowly gaining recognition



MANILA, Nov. 3 (Xinhua) -- An unknown, self-taught artist who painted a portrait of Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte is slowly getting noticed in the media and in the art world.
Mart Henry Bongabong, 31, a college dropout, said in a recent interview that he still could not believe that the portrait he painted is now hanging in the reception hall of the Malacanang presidential palace alongside the presidential portraits of past Philippine leaders painted by famous Philippine artists.
"Never in my wildest dreams did I think that one day my painting, a portrait of a Philippine president, would end up hanging in the historic walls of the palace," he told Xinhua in a telephone interview.
Unlike nationally recognized artists, Bongabong managed to hone his skills without the luxury of having an art school background. A lack of finances forced him to drop out of college because his father, a fisherman, and mother, a housewife, could not afford to send all six of their children to school. When he was growing up, he said he helped his father mend fishing nets to help supplement the family's income.
The family moved a number of times in Mindanao, an island in the southern Philippines, to look for greener pastures. When their parents died, the siblings decided to live where they could find work. Bongabong had decided to make Davao City his home after hearing "a lot of good things" that Duterte had been doing to keep the city safe.
"I didn't go to a fine arts school. I am just an ordinary artist, a son of a poor fisherman from Zamboanga, yet my artwork is now on display in the palace alongside other Philippine national artists like (Fernando) Amorsolo," he said.
Until now, Bongabong said he could not believe that his oil painting on a 30-inch by 40-inch linen canvass of Duterte was selected over works by many more popular painters.
Bongabong's portrait depicts a compassionate president. Bongabong painted Duterte's head just very slightly rose, showing pride yet with a smile on his face. "I portrayed him as someone who is approachable and humble," Bongabong said. "I guess my hard work paid off."
Bongabong, knows as Macky to his friends, is virtually unknown in the art world. Except for some friends and clients who go to his fine arts kiosk inside a shopping mall in Davao, Duterte's home city, Bongabong said nobody really knows his work.
"Who would have thought that someone would notice my talent as a painter?" Bongabong said.
It all started sometime in August when a staff from the Office of the President dropped a note to Bongabong's rented kiosk in a shopping mall in Davao.
"I was nervous when I saw the stationery that said Office of the President Manila. I called the mobile number written on it and heard the good news. I was being asked to do a portrait of our beloved president. I was nervous and excited at the same time," he recalled.
Bongabong said the task was scary for someone who has no formal training in painting.
"I could feel the tremendous pressure on my shoulders. But I accepted the challenge. I didn't want my insecurities to get in the way," he said.
The Office of the President emailed Duterte's photo to Bongabong "for guidance."
For the next 30 days, Bongabong said he was sketching, painting and mixing colors on his palette to create a "natural" Duterte. "I made sure that the colors popped," he said, adding that he wanted the painting to be "alive."
He considers the portrait painting to be his greatest work so far, earning glowing compliments from the palace. "I was told my portrait was both natural and vibrant," he said.
He added, "I consider it a labor of love. Every single day for a month I was happy to wake up and paint somebody I know, I respect and look up to. Plus I think the emotions that I put into it, my life struggles and experiences went into every inch of detail with each brush stroke.
On Oct. 16, Bongabong personally presented the portrait painting to Duterte at the Davao international airport before the leader left for his state visits to Brunei and China.
"I cried. I was overwhelmed when I saw him. I was awed. He was very soft-spoken. He even joked that he would commission my team again for more paintings," he said.
"It was a gift of love to President Duterte who we consider a tatay (father)," he said.
After their meeting that lasted several minutes, Bongabong said Duterte invited him for dinner at the palace a few days later. It would be Bongabong's first time to set foot in the official residence and principal workplace of Philippine presidents.
Also invited to the dinner were his two apprentices, Keren Hanhah Golea and sister Krystle Ann Golea who also gave Duterte a charcoal painting of Duterte kissing his mother's hands. Golea's charcoal painting is also now hanging on the walls of Bahay Pangarap just across from the palace where Duterte lives when he is in Manila.
Bongabong remembered his first fleeting encounter with then Davao City Mayor Duterte back in 2013. He said he and his friends went up to him at the mall and requested a photo to which the former mayor readily agreed. Little did he know that three years later he would be invited to have dinner with Duterte at the palace.
He said he is looking forward to the dinner with Duterte. "I cannot ask for more. If that happens then I will just thank him again for appreciating my work and for giving me the opportunity to paint his portrait. It's a real honor and a privilege," he said.
Bongabong has indeed come a long way.
From the rural fishing village of Zamboanga, the bachelor who runs a small art shop in a shopping mall will share dinner with the 71-year-old Duterte, the Philippines' 16th president and the first president from Mindanao.
Duterte is now immortalized in an official portrait that now hangs in the halls of power where artworks of known Filipino artists are also on display.
Bongabong's advice to aspiring painters is encouraging. "Appreciate what you have and use it. Love your work and keep practicing to hone your skills. Always give it your best. Being poor is not hindrance," the artist said. 

