2016-08-20

 Duterte resumes ceasefire ahead of peace talks with communist rebels



MANILA, Aug. 20 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte
declared on Saturday an indefinite ceasefire to pave the way for
resumption of peace talks with communist rebels next week, said
Presidential Peace Adviser Jesus Dureza.

The peace talks are scheduled for Aug. 22 in Oslo, Norway.
President Duterte has "restored the effects of the unilateral
ceasefire with the Communist Party of the Philippines and the
National Democratic Front effective 12 midnight tonight, Aug. 21,"
Dureza told a news conference at the international airport before
leaving for Oslo with the government panel.

"The duration of the ceasefire will last for as long as
necessary to bring peace in the land," he said.

Duterte declared a unilateral ceasefire on July 25 but scrapped
it six days later after the rebels failed to reciprocate and
attacked and killed a militia man.

"The enabling environment brought about by this 'silencing of
the guns' will hopefully go a long way in bringing about an
expeditious and early resolution to our differences and aspirations
that have long divided us as a people," said Dureza.

He said the restoration of the ceasefire came a few days after
Duterte has released from detention about 20 prisoners who are
needed in the peace negotiations.

"As we speak there is continuing efforts to make available in
Oslo peace talks resumption as many of them as possible," Dureza
said, referring to the remaining political prisoners that will take
part in the talks as "consultants."

The Philippine government released from jail on Friday two
communist leaders, Benito Tiamzon and his wife, Wilma, to allow
them to participate in the Oslo talks.

The Tiamzons are the highest-ranking communist leader in
detention after they were arrested in 2014. The government said
Benito Tiamzon was the chairman of the Communist Party of the
Philippines while his wife Wilma was the secretary general.

A few hours after their release, the Communist Party of the
Philippines declared a seven-day unilateral ceasefire that will
take effect 12:01 a.m. on Aug. 21 and will last until 11:59 p.m. on
Aug. 27.

"This ceasefire declaration is encouraged by the (Philippine
government's) facilitation of the release of the nearly all
National Democratic Front of the Philippines consultants who are
set to participate in peace negotiations in the course of the next
several months," the rebels said in a statement.

The Oslo talks are expected to tackle "social and economic
reforms, political and constitutional reforms, end of hostilities
and disposition of forces, ceasefire, joint security and immunity
and release of political detainees," according to Dureza.

The Duterte administration is trying to forge peace with the
communist rebels. Talks between the government and the rebels began
in 1986, but failed to lead to a resolution over the years.

The communist rebellion began in 1969 and reached its peak in
1987 when it boasted 26,000 armed guerillas. However, the movement
has since dwindled due to differences in strategy and tactics and
the arrests of many of its top leaders in the late 1980s.

The military estimates the current number of communist armed
rebels to be around 4,000. Enditem


