2016-10-10

 U.S., Philippine marines cut short joint military exercises



U.S. marines and Philippine troops prepare for a joint live fire military exercise as part of the 2016 Amphibious Landing Exercise (PHIBLEX) in Tarlac Province, the Philippines, Oct. 10, 2016. At least 1,400 U.S. marines based in Okinawa, Japan, and 500 Philippine troops participated in this year's PHIBLEX which was held from Oct. 4 to Oct. 12. (Xinhua/Rouelle Umali)
MANILA, Oct. 10 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. and Philippine marines have decided to cut short their amphibious landing exercises and live-fire training in the Philippines, ending the games one day ahead of schedule, a spokesman for the Philippine marines said on Monday.
Both sides have agreed to end the exercises on Tuesday instead of Wednesday, Capt. Ryan Lacuesta, spokesman for the Philippine marines, said.
The drills, which started on Oct. 4, were conducted in several areas in the Philippine Luzon island and Palawan province.
Lacuesta told reporters that the closing ceremony would be held at the Philippine marine headquarters in Manila on Tuesday.
"All major events have already been conducted. All the major exercises have been accomplished already so we decided to move the closing," he said.
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, who assumed presidency in June, said he wants to terminate military exercises with the U.S. during his term and prohibit the Philippine military from joining in joint patrols in the South China Sea.
The U.S. and the Philippines conduct three major joint exercises and 28 minor cross-training exercises every year. 
Related:
Philippine foreign secretary says U.S. has failed Philippines
MANILA, Oct. 6 (Xinhua) -- Philippine Foreign Secretary Perfecto Yasay said on Thursday that the United States has failed the Philippines, forcing President Rodrigo Duterte to break away from Washington.
Yasay made the comments in a statement posted on his Facebook page, saying, "This has compelled him (President Duterte) to realign our foreign policy towards an independent track in pursuing the overriding national interest."   Full story

Philippine president threatens to "break up" with U.S.
MANILA, Oct. 4 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Tuesday that he would "eventually" cut ties with the United States.
Duterte again hit out at the United States and its president, the European Union and the United Nations for using human rights to criticize his campaign to curb the illicit drug menace in the Philippines.  Full story
 

