 Commentary: South China Sea fares better without outside interference






Fishing boats anchor at the Tanmen port in Qionghai City, south China's Hainan Province, May 16, 2016. China banned fishing from May 16 to Aug. 1 in the South China Sea, a measure taken for the 18th consecutive year. (Xinhua/Meng Zhongde)
BEIJING, June 3 (Xinhua) -- It has been widely speculated that the South China Sea will dominate the Shangri-La Dialogue, an Asia-Pacific defense and security summit opened on Friday in Singapore.
If so, the three-day meeting, which gathers military brass, intelligence officers and civilian leaders and promises to play a constructive role in regional security, will be another platform hijacked to make a fanfare of the maritime disputes.
Around the South China Sea, another negative development is that a few, particularly non-claimants, have been busy expanding presence and flexing military muscles around the South China Sea, as an international arbitration tribunal in The Hague prepares to deliver a ruling in the next few months over a case about the issue unilaterally lodged by Manila in 2013.
This adds to the worry that outside interference, which stems from various self-interests, has become an increasingly serious menace to stability in the South China Sea.
For example, the United States has conducted several so-called "freedom of navigation" operations by closely flying or sailing past South China Sea islands, blatantly violating China's sovereign and security interests.
In the meantime, the U.S. military made a series of harsh rhetoric on the issue. During his speech at the U.S. Naval Academy at the end of last month, Defense Secretary Ash Carter said the Pentagon's best weapons will be deployed to the Pacific region.
The words and deeds, with an obvious intention to create a volatile situation to help Washington preserve hegemonic presence in the Asia-Pacific region, will embolden certain claimants to make hot-headed moves on the issue.
These claimants should be reminded that if a confrontation between the United States and China whose sovereignty over the South China Sea islands is backed by both legal and historical facts should take place, regional countries will face a Cold War dilemma of picking sides between the world's two largest economies. To avoid such agony, they should be work together for common development and prosperity.
In fact, before the recent disturbances struck, the South China Sea situation had been generally peaceful thanks to Beijing's exercise of restraint and concerted efforts of most countries in the region.
Despite the territorial rows between China and other claimants, freedom of navigation and overflight in the South China Sea has never been a problem. China also views the waters as being vital to global trade and its own development.
The good old time has proven that Beijing and other claimants, whose security and development interests are intensely interwoven, are capable of settling the disputes by themselves.
Successive leaders of claimant countries have agreed in their meetings and political documents that the South China Sea disputes should be resolved peacefully through direct negotiations. This stance is also stated in the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea.
What's heartening is that some positive signs have appeared. Among them, the incoming Philippine Foreign Minister Perfecto Yasay has said bilateral talks between the Philippines and China could help untangle the disputes in the South China Sea.
"There is no other way but to go bilateral," he said. The remarks were welcomed by the Chinese sides. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said during a visit to Canada that "the door of dialogue between China and the Philippines is always open."
It is very true that for the South China Sea disputes to be untangled as soon as possible and for the busy patch of water to remain permanently peaceful, outsiders should withdraw their meddling hands and allow the parties directly involved to give their wisdom and pragmatism a full play. 
Related:
Commentary: Door always open for China-Philippines dialogue
BEIJING, June 3 (Xinhua) -- The door of dialogue between China and the Philippines is always open as long as Manila desires to resolve any dispute through negotiations.
Philippine President-elect Rodrigo Duterte said his country would adopt an independent foreign policy from his predecessor. Incoming Foreign Minister Perfecto Yasay also said he would like to resume bilateral talks with China.  Full story
Facts show Taiping Dao is island, not rock, says FM
BEIJING, June 3 (Xinhua) -- History and facts show that Taiping Dao in the South China Sea is an island rather than a rock, said a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson on Friday.
"China has indisputable sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and its adjacent waters, including Taiping Dao. China has, based on the Nansha Islands as a whole, territorial sea, exclusive economic zone and continental shelf," said Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying.  Full story
Admiral Sun Jianguo to expound China's stance on security issues at Shangri-La Dialogue
SINGAPORE, June 3 (Xinhua) -- Admiral Sun Jianguo, deputy chief of the Joint Staff Department of China's Central Military Commission, will deliver a speech elaborating China's stance on international and regional security issues at the Shangri-La Dialogue, a spokesman said on Friday.
Yang Yujun, spokesman of China's Defense Ministry, told the Chinese media that Admiral Sun will deliver a speech themed "the Challenges of Conflict Resolution" at the plenary session of the 15th Shangri-La Dialogue on Sunday.  Full story
China is staunch force for peace, stability in South China Sea: ambassador
LONDON, May 20 (Xinhua) -- China is committed to peace and stability in the South China Sea, and desires to solve disputes peacefully through negotiation, Chinese Ambassador to Britain Liu Xiaoming said Friday.
In a speech at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, Liu said China has long exercised "a high-level of self-restraint and forbearance" regarding the territorial disputes in the region. Full story
China calls for bilateral means to solve South China Sea disputes
BEIJING, May 20 (Xinhua) -- China on Friday called on the Philippines to settle disputes over the South China Sea through bilateral consultation and negotiation.
The Philippines has reportedly claimed arbitration was its last resort after all bilateral means had been exhausted. On the other hand, some people say China and the Philippines have never held negotiations over the Philippines' claims. Full story
Arbitration case ticking time bomb against Philippines: columnist
MANILA, May 15 (Xinhua) -- The South China Sea arbitration case the Philippines filed is like a ticking time bomb working against the country, a columnist wrote on Saturday.
Rod Kapunan, a columnist for the Philippines' daily newspaper The Standard, published an article named "Inciting to War with China."
According to Kapunan, bring the case to Permant Court of Arbitration (PCA) was a lose-lose proposition. Full story 
China values free navigation in South China Sea more than any other country: senior military official
BEIJING, May 12 (Xinhua) -- China values the freedom of navigation and peace and stability in the South China Sea more than any other country in the world, said Fang Fenghui, a member of China's Central Military Commission (CMC), on Thursday.
Fang, who is also chief of the newly-established Joint Staff Department under the CMC, made the remarks during a video conversation with U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Joseph Dunford.Full story 

