2016-08-13

 Philippine gov't, Moro rebel group reiterate commitment to peace process



KUALA LUMPUR, Aug. 13 (Xinhua) -- The Philippine government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) rejuvenated the peace process in the Southern Philippines on Saturday by launching the implementing phase of the peace agreements.
The meeting held in the Malaysian capital is the first under President Rodrigo Duterte, two years after the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro (CAB) between the Philippine government and MILF in 2014 facilitated by Malaysia.
Philippine presidential adviser on the peace process Jesus Dureza hailed the entering of implementation phase as another milestone in the peace process, stressing the commitment by the new Philippine administration to honor previous peace agreements.
Manila's commitment was partly demonstrated by the high level delegation at the meeting, including cabinet members like Foreign Secretary Perfecto Yasay and senior lawmakers.
Murad Ebrahim, chairman of MILF, said continuing the peace process remains the only reasonable and viable pathway that could bring progress, development and lasting peace to the Philippines.
He said MILF would welcome Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) led by Nur Misuari as well as other factions to participate in the peace process.
The implementation of the peace agreement with the MILF largely depends on its political track since the Bangsamoro Basic Law, the supposed implementing mechanism of the CAB, failed to pass in the previous Congress during the precedency of Benigno Aquino III.
The security concerns over Southern Philippines has increased since the rise of IS, to which some militants including members of the terrorist terrorist Abu Sayyaf group had pleaded allegiance.
Speaking at the event on Saturday, Malaysian deputy defence minister Mohd Johari Baharom said a handful of Malaysians had sneaked into the Philippines to join Abu Sayyaf.
He said a successful peace process in the region would fend off the threat by IS.
For his part, MILF chairman Murad Ebrahim admitted that IS elements had penetrated the area, "but we are confident that if the peace process succeed, IS will not get foothold" in the region. 

