 Xinhua world news summary at 0130 GMT, Sept. 3



TASHKENT -- Uzbek President Islam Karimov died on Friday at the
age of 78 after being hospitalized following a stroke on Aug. 27,
the Uzbek government confirmed.

His funeral will be held on Saturday in the historic town of
Samarkand, where he was born, a government statement said, adding
that a three-day period of mourning would start on the same day.
(Uzbek-Karimov)

- - - -
UNITED NATIONS -- UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Friday
said that he "is saddened" to learn of the death of Islam Karimov,
the president of Uzbekistan, and he extended his sincere
condolences to the bereaved family of President Karimov, the
government and the people of Uzbekistan.

"The secretary-general pays tribute to the late president's
efforts to develop strong ties between Uzbekistan and the United
Nations as well as strengthen regional and global peace and
security, through the promotion and entry into force in 2009 of the
Treaty to establish the Central Asian Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone,"
said a statement issued here by Ban's spokesman.(UN-Uzbekistan)

- - - -
WASHINGTON -- U.S. space agency NASA said Friday it has approved
the launch of its Mars lander known as InSight in spring 2018 to
study the Red Planet's deep interior.

The Interior Exploration using Seismic Investigations, Geodesy
and Heat Transport (InSight) mission was originally scheduled to
launch in March this year, but NASA suspended launch preparations
in December due to a vacuum leak in the lander's prime science
instrument. (NASA-Mars)

- - - -
ANKARA -- 11 Turkish soldiers were killed in clashes with the
outlawed Kurdish Workers' Party ( PKK) militants on Friday in
eastern Van and southeastern Mardin provinces, Milliyet News
reported.

Three soldiers were killed when a military post in Dargecit
district of Mardin was attacked by PKK militants on Friday, and
three village guards and a civilian were injured. (Turkey-PKK)

- - - -
DAVAO CITY -- At least 10 people have been confirmed dead and
scores others wounded in an explosion in the hometown of Philippine
President Rodrigo Duterte on Friday night, officials said on
Saturday, amid fears the toll could further rise.

Aside from the fatalities, some 60 others were rushed to
different hospitals following the blast in downtown Davao City,
according to presidential spokesperson Ernesto Abella.
(Philippine-Explosion) Enditem


