2016-07-13



 China says ADIZ in South China Sea depends on threat




BEIJING, July 13 (Xinhua) -- China said on Wednesday that it will decide whether to declare an Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) in the South China Sea in accordance with the level of threat.
"The ADIZ is not a Chinese invention, but rather that of some big powers. If our security were threatened, of course we have the right. It depends on our comprehensive judgment," said Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin at a press briefing at the Information Office of the State Council.
A white paper titled "China Adheres to the Position of Settling Through Negotiation the Relevant Disputes Between China and the Philippines in the South China Sea" was published on Wednesday, after an award was issued on Tuesday in the arbitration unilaterally initiated by the former Philippine government.
Liu urged other countries not to "take the opportunity to threaten China," and called on other countries to work with China to jointly maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea.
Liu reiterated that settling relevant disputes between China and the Philippines in the South China Sea through negotiation is the consistent policy of the Chinese government.
The South China Sea issue is not a problem between China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Liu stressed, saying that China would make joint efforts with ASEAN countries to resolve the disputes through negotiations, manage disputes by making rules, and achieve win-win results by practical cooperation.
"We hope to work with countries surrounding the South China Sea, including ASEAN members, abide by the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, maintain peace and stability as well as the freedom of navigation and overflight in the South China Sea," Liu said.
He noted such a policy has not changed and will not change.
As for the arbitration award, the vice foreign minister reaffirmed that China will not execute the award. He called on the Philippines to return to the track of bilateral negotiation.
The five-member arbitration tribunal is neither an international tribunal nor an international court of justice under the UN framework, he said, adding that it is neither an international tribunal for the law of the sea nor a permanent court of arbitration.
Thus, he said the tribunal lacks authority and credibility, and the award of the South China Sea arbitration is null and void.
He said China has made unremitting efforts to resolve the South China Sea issue in a peaceful manner, and reached important consensus with successive Philippine governments on resolving the disputes peacefully and promoting maritime practical cooperation.
Commenting on the positive reactions from Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte and his government, Liu said China stands ready to work with the new Philippine government, properly settle the South China Sea disputes and bring bilateral ties back to the right track at an early date.
The two countries will continue promoting maritime cooperation and common development, and not allow the disputes to affect the healthy development of their relations and peace and stability in the region, according to the vice foreign minister. 


