2016-07-15

 Interview: Czech MEP says negotiated solutions to South China Sea dispute acceptable 
for both sides



BRUSSELS, July 15 (Xinhua) -- Long-lasting solutions to the
South China Sea dispute between China and the Philippines must be
acceptable for both sides, and could only be reached through
bilateral dialogues, a Czech member of the European Parliament
(MEP) said Thursday.

"I think that the nature of the South China Sea dispute is very
complex and a single ruling cannot be all-encompassing," Miroslav
Poche, also a member of the European Parliament's delegation for
relations with China, told Xinhua.

The arbitration was unilaterally initiated in 2013 by the former
Philippine government and its award was issued on Tuesday,
sweepingly siding with Manila's cunningly packaged claims.

China has refused to participate in the proceedings, reiterating
its stance that it neither accepts nor recognizes the award.

Poche said former Philippine President Benigno S. Aquino III's
decision to file the case to an arbitral tribunal has provided no
help to the dispute, but undermined international law.

"I believe one of the important aspects of international law is
the respectable role of international institutions which play a
role and help all sides to find a solution," he said.

"In my opinion, acceptable solutions to such a dispute should
respect human principle," Poche said. "First, it has to be based on
the whole body of international law; second, only a peaceful means
that is used to achieve a final settlement can be accepted."

He pointed out that the dispute between China and the
Philippines is a bilateral issue, which can only be solved through
direct dialogue and consultation, adding that "it is necessary at
the same time that there are no superpowers involved in any
solution to the problem."

Noting that involvement from the United States and other
countries outside the region may add imbalance to the situation,
Poche suggested the European Union (EU) not to interfere.

He added that the international community including the EU
should encourage both China and the Philippines to engage in direct
negotiation as soon as possible.

"We all appreciate that both sides tend for a peaceful solution.
The international community can facilitate hopes for the process
instead of being arbitrary," he said.

Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said earlier on Thursday
that he is asking former President Fidel Ramos to help start talks
with China over the South China Sea dispute. Enditem


