2016-06-03

 Manila urged to return to negotiating table over S. China Sea dispute



An aerial photo taken on Sept. 25, 2015 from a seaplane of Hainan Maritime Safety Administration shows cruise vessel Haixun 1103 heading to the Yacheng 13-1 drilling rig during a patrol in south China Sea. (Xinhua/Zhao Yingquan)
BEIJING, June 3 (Xinhua) -- A Chinese scholar on Thursday urged the Philippines to engage in bilateral talks with China to resolve their South China Sea dispute as its incoming administration expressed willingness to bring the maritime issues back to the negotiating table.
The attitude of the Philippines' new administration over the handling of the South China Sea dispute could serve as a start for seeking a bilateral solution to relevant issues, Zhou Yongsheng, professor with China Foreign Affairs University, told Xinhua in an interview.
On Tuesday, Perfecto Yasay, the Philippines' incoming foreign minister, stressed the new administration's willingness to pursue bilateral talks with China to resolve their dispute in the South China Sea.
On a separate occasion, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, who was on a visit to Canada, expressed China's welcome if Manila sincerely wants to come back to the track of dialogue and negotiations.
The positive signals sent by the two sides could be used to help bring the South China Sea dispute back to the negotiating table, said Zhou.
He urged Manila to withdraw its unilaterally-initiated arbitration at the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague regarding the South China Sea row.
Neither does the tribunal have the right to hear the case nor exercise jurisdiction, said the expert on Asia affairs. He illustrated his view by citing a declaration China made in 2006, which excludes a compulsory arbitration under the Article 298 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
The invalid arbitration case, which was brought up by outgoing President Benigno Aquino in 2013, has stirred up tensions in the South China Sea, in the Philippines' bid to cooperate with Washington's Asia-rebalancing strategy.
Aimed at building closer ties with the United States and Japan, Aquino's "tricks" by seeking arbitration over the maritime dispute have not helped solve the South China Sea row, but added risks to regional peace and security, Zhou said.
In contrast to the Aquino administration's reluctance to engage in dialogue with Beijing, the Philippines' incoming president Rodrigo Duterte has said on several occasions that he wanted to cultivate friendly relations with China, and confirmed that he was open to direct talks over the row in the South China Sea.
Duterte's policies are more open and pragmatic than those of his predecessor, Zhou said. "Such kind of policies should be welcome," the scholar said.
As dialogue and negotiations are conducive to breaking the deadlock in Manila-Beijing relations, the professor suggested that the two sides step up engagement so as to resolve their dispute through dialogue as soon as possible. 
Related:
China hopes Philippines' new government choose dialogue on sea disputes
BEIJING, June 1 (Xinhua) -- China hopes the Philippines' new government can return to dialogue with China to resolve the South China Sea disputes, a spokesperson said Wednesday.
The comment came after the Philippines' incoming foreign minister Perfecto Yasay said that bilateral talks between the Philippines and China could help untangle the disputes in the South China Sea, adding "there is no other way but to go bilateral."  Full story
Philippines president-elect Duterte hails China's Xi Jinping as "great president"
MANILA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Incoming Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte has said he was "honored" to receive a congratulatory message from Chinese President Xi Jinping, calling him a great leader, Philippine media reported on Wednesday.
"I was honored receiving a congratulatory message from a great president," Duterte reportedly made the remarks on Tuesday when speaking with reporters in Davao City after unveiling the members of his cabinet to the media.  Full story
Commentary: Philippines jeopardizes chance for cooperation with China
BEIJING, May 17 (Xinhua) -- The Philippines is carelessly throwing away a chance offered by China to jointly solve the disputes over the South China Sea issue through dialogue and consultation, some analysts argue, as the Philippines has sought out the help of the international arbitration tribunal.
The Philippines's pursuit of such an arbitration is completely self-defeating, as Rod Kapunan, a columnist for Philippine newspaper The Standard, wrote in the daily on Saturday.  Full story
Commentary: Sound Sino-Philippine ties to benefit all
BEIJING, May 10 (Xinhua) -- As the Philippines is set to have a new president, Sino-Philippine relations become a topic again. Sound ties between China and the Philippines will benefit all and boost peace and development in the region, including the Philippines itself.  Full story

