2016-10-26

 Commentary: Japan should contribute to promoting peace in Asia-Pacific


by Xinhua Writer Chen Shilei
BEIJING, Oct. 26 (Xinhua) -- As the Asia-Pacific is seeing a growing consensus that maritime disputes should be handled via direct talks among parties concerned, Japan should stop stoking tensions in the region, and truly honor its promise to make peace.
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte is on a three-day visit Wednesday to Japan, a visit on which Tokyo has pinned hope to keep its ties with Manila tight amid concerns that Manila could "separate" from the alliance with the United States, Tokyo's key ally in the area.
The concerns were enhanced after Duterte, a recalcitrant leader in Washington's eyes, paid a visit last week to China at a time when China-Philippines ties have nosedived to a historical low due to the farcical South China Sea arbitration case brought by his predecessor Benigno Aquino III against China.
In fact, in the arbitration process, Japan and the United States -- both outsiders in the South China Sea disputes -- have relentlessly supported the former Philippine government.
Moreover, Japan is trying to rope other countries into speaking out on the South China Sea issue.
Tokyo is even planning on stepping up its activities in the South China Sea through joint training patrols with the United States and exercises with regional navies.
By stepping up its intervention in the South China Sea, Japan hopes to sufficiently distract Beijing so that it will be unable to handle maritime spats with Japan in the East China Sea at the same time.
Also, Washington wants Tokyo to help implement its strategy of rebalancing to the Asia-Pacific, and be a key counterbalance to a rising China. Japan seems to be quite cooperative in this.
Right now, peacefully resolving the South China Sea disputes through negotiations has become a consensus between China and other parties including the Philippines, a major territorial claimant.
And that is why Duterte and Chinese leaders were able to sit down together last week to discuss how to achieve overall improvement and greater progress in bilateral ties.
Of course, Japan is free to develop its ties with countries in the region, including the Philippines.
But it is advisable that Japan abandon its ambition to stir up regional tensions, and stop muddying the waters in the South China Sea. After all, peace and stability in the region are also in its own interests. 
 

