2016-07-28

 Philippine president threatens to withdraw unilateral ceasefire with the Left



MANILA, July 28 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte on Thursday threatened to withdraw the unilateral ceasefire that he declared with the Communist Party of the Philippines-New People's Army-National Democratic Front (CPP-NPA-NDF) after the rebel group launched ambush that resulted in the death of a government militiamen in the Davao del Sur the other day.
Duterte, during his visit to a military camp in Lucena City in Quezon, said he demanded an immediate explanation from the CPP in connection with the incident in which one was killed and another three were injured.
Duterte said he relayed his message to the NDF that he wants the CPP to make it clear if they are serious about the peace negotiations and if they have control over their armed men on the ground.
The president said the members of the Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit (CAFGU) are part of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
Duterte also said that he expects disciplinary actions to be taken against the members of the NPA that were involved in the attack saying that under the government those who violate the law, including members of the police and military, will be penalized when they break the law.
"I demand an answer as to who broke the law, they must be put under disciplinary actions otherwise we don't have a deal. That is my deal," he added.
The president declared a unilateral ceasefire during his state of the nation address on Monday as a sign of goodwill and provide a conducive atmosphere to the peace negotiations with the CPP-NPA-NDF that would resume on August 20 to 27 in Norway.
He said apart from the ceasefire the government has already started the process of issuing a safe conduct pass for members of the communist rebels that would participate in the peace talks.
Duterte had urged the military for understanding as he explained anew why he had to declare a ceasefire with the communist group.
He reiterated that apart from his desire for peace, as commander in chief and president of the country he had to think of the welfare of the general public and what is good for everyone.
Duterte said he knows that a lot of the military men and even policemen are resistant to the truce especially after many of their colleagues had died during operations, but there had already been a lot of deaths and the war had already gone too long.
The communist rebellion has killed 30,000 people since 1960s, and the NPA is believed to have fewer than 4,000 men today, down from a peak of 26,000 in the 1980s, according to the military. 

