2016-07-29

 6 Abu Sayyaf members killed, 11 soldiers injured in S Philippine skirmishes



MANILA, July 29 (Xinhua) -- Six members of the Abu Sayyaf Group were killed while 11 government's soldiers were injured in separate skirmishes in southern Philippine provinces of Basilan and Sulu on Friday morning, local authorities said.
Two Abu Sayyaf members were killed in a firefight with soldiers from the Joint Task Force Basilan at Hill 490, barangay Poblacion in Tipo-tipo town in Basilan, said Filemon Tan, spokesman of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)' Western Mindanao Command.
Tan said the troops were on a security operation when they caught up with undetermined number of Abu Sayyaf Group members at around 6:30 a.m. local time.
The firefight left nine soldiers injured, who were later airlifted to Camp Navarro General Station in Zamboanga City.
In Sulu, four Abu Sayyaf members died in another clash with forces from the Joint Task Force Sulu in barangay Langpas in Indanan town around 8:50 a.m. local time.
"Close air support was provided to the engaged troops," said Tan, referring to Air Force attack helicopters that provided air firepower for the troops.
During clearing operations, the troops recovered the bodies of the four slain Abu Sayyaf men who were said to be under sub-leader Alden Bagadi, alias Sayning.
"On the government side, two soldiers were slightly wounded," said Tan, adding the wounded troops were brought to a hospital in Camp Bautista in Jolo town.
Tan said the Armed Forces has coordinated with Philippine National Police's Scene of the Crime Operatives for the documentation of the recovered enemy bodies.
Tan said government troops were still conducting pursuit operations against the remnants of the encountered Abu Sayyaf elements in Basilan and Sulu.
"The military continues to conduct all-out offensives targeting the Abu Sayyaf Group to neutralize the threat group in Basilan and Sulu," said Tan.
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte ordered the military to crush the Abu Sayyaf Group and other lawless groups on Monday during his first State of the Nation Address.
"Since our country continues to be confronted with internal security threats aggravated by the existence and activities of the Abu Sayyaf Group, the full force of the AFP will be applied to crush these criminals who operate under the guise of religious fervor," he said.
The Abu Sayyaf bandits have engaged in kidnappings and beheadings of some of their hostages who failed to pay ransom they have demanded.
The latest kidnapped victims were five Malaysian sailors who were abducted last week between southern waters of Tawi-Tawi and Sabah.
The president said his administration has strengthened coordination with Indonesia and Malaysia to suppress kidnappings in their waters. 

