 Commentary: Time to end South China Sea arbitration farce



by Xinhua Writer Jiang Li
BEIJING, July 12 (Xinhua) -- The South China Sea arbitration came to an end with an arbitral tribunal in The Hague issuing an award on Tuesday, but the verdict is null and void and only serves to complicate the situation in the region.
With obvious loopholes and deliberate proceedings circumventing regular arbitration rules, the tribunal undermines international law and sets a bad example for settling sovereign disputes.
China has reiterated its stance of non-participation in and non-acceptance of the arbitration. To fully respect international law and justice, China will never recognize the verdict and never be "forced" into accepting it.
The former Philippine government and the United States behind it have conspired for a long time to blackmail China regarding its historic rights to the South China Sea, but to do it through a tribunal that tramples on international justice goes too far.
For starters, Manila broke its own commitment made in the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in 2002, which was signed between China and members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to settle disputes through consultation and negotiation.
Without consulting with China over the means of dispute settlement, the former Philippine government unilaterally filed a compulsory arbitration against China in 2013.
Despite Manila's claim to seek a verdict over the status and maritime entitlements of relevant features in the Nansha Islands, the subject matter regards sovereignty and delimitation issues clearly beyond the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.
To make matters worse, some countries outside the region have been making waves to serve their own interests.
The United States has been attempting to "fish in troubled waters" while instigating the Philippines to act on the so-called legal front. Sending warships and warplanes and holding military maneuvers, the United States has spared no efforts to stir up the waters of the South China Sea with its so-called "Pivot to Asia" strategy.
Meanwhile, Japan is an accomplice that attempted to hijack the Group of Seven meeting in April with the South China Sea issue as part of its efforts to serve its audacious ambitions.
The arbitration has only escalated tensions in the region and by no means helps to solve the disputes. The undermining of international law and the repercussions of a law-abusing arbitration are even more worrying than the dispute itself.
The new Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte has expressed the desire to engage in dialogue with China on the South China Sea issue, which is a welcomed sign.
Under the dual-track approach initially proposed by ASEAN, China and the Philippines could negotiate in line with international law and get bilateral ties back on track.
It's high time to put an end to this farce that has dragged on for too long. 
Related:
Backgrounder: A brief look at the South China Sea arbitration case
Full text of statement of China's Foreign Ministry on award of South China Sea arbitration initiated by Philippines
BEIJING, July 12 (Xinhua) -- Following is the full text of the Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China on the Award of 12 July 2016 of the Arbitral Tribunal in the South China Sea Arbitration Established at the Request of the Republic of the Philippines issued on Tuesday.    Full story
Full text of Chinese gov't statement on China's territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests in S. China Sea
BEIJING, July 12 (Xinhua) -- Following is the full text of a statement of the Chinese government on China's territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests in the South China Sea issued on Tuesday. Full story
More countries voice support for China's stance on S. China Sea
BEIJING, July 11 (Xinhua) -- More countries have voiced their support for China's position on the South China Sea issue "despite pressure," a spokesperson for Chinese Foreign Ministry said here on Monday.
Lu Kang's remarks at the ministry's routine press briefing came after Cambodia reiterated on Saturday that the country would not support the arbitration court's upcoming decision over the South China Sea issue.    Full story
Commentary: U.S. should stop treating South China Sea as next Caribbean
MEXICO CITY, July 10 (Xinhua) -- The United States should stay away from the South China Sea issue and avoid repeating its history of military intervention and political manipulation in the Caribbean in the past century.
The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague will announce its award on Tuesday in an arbitration case filed unilaterally by the Philippines against China on disputes over the South China Sea. Full Story
Commentary: U.S. cold-war mentality not solution to South China Sea issue
BEIJING, July 9 (Xinhua) -- The South China Sea arbitration initiated by the Philippines and without China's consent is a political farce.
The reason is simple: the United States is using the administration of former Philippine President Benigno S. Aquino III to raise tensions in the region. Full Story


