 Philippine president wants "conversation," "not adversarial" ties with China: spokesman



MANILA, July 1 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte wanted a "conversation" with China on the South China Sea in a bid to work out a "win-win relationship" with the country, presidential spokesman Ernesto Abella said on Friday.
"Basically he's being friendly toward China. I think it's an indication on how he wants to handle the relationship, not to be adversarial but to really work out a relationship that will be win-win for both," Abella said in an interview with the television ANC.
"I think the point of the president is ... we are not in a position to engage military operations and stuff like that. So, it really makes common sense," he said.
A few hours after taking office as the country's 16th president Thursday, Duterte told a cabinet meeting at the presidential palace not to "flaunt" a possibly favorable ruling in a case filed by the Philippines at the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague.
The tribunal has said that it would be handing down the ruling on July 12.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said on Wednesday that the tribunal, "established on the basis of illegal conduct and claims of the Philippines," has no jurisdiction over the case and the relevant subject matter, and should not have heard the case or render any award.
Duterte brought up the issue during the televised meeting.
While the decision on the arbitration case might be favorable to the Philippines, "it would also put the country in an awkward position especially with China (in terms of relations)," Duterte said.
"God knows I really do not want to declare any fighting with anybody. And if we can have peace by just talking, I would be very happy," he added.
Foreign Secretary Perfecto Yasay also informed Duterte during the meeting that he was "averse" to issuing a "strong" statement in case of a favorable ruling, rejecting suggestions by foreign representatives. 
Related:
China reaffirms non-acceptance of South China Sea arbitration
BEIJING, June 30 (Xinhua) -- China reaffirmed on Thursday that it will not accept a third party dispute settlement or any solution imposed on China.
Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hong Lei made the remarks at a routine press briefing when asked to comment on the Arbitral Tribunal's claim that it would soon issue the so-called final award of the South China Sea arbitration unilaterally initiated by the Philippines. Full story
Consultation is way to keep peace, stability in South China Sea: Greek party official
ATHENS, June 30 (Xinhua) -- Amicable consultation is the only way to resolve the escalating tension in the South China Sea, a Greek party official and expert in international relations told Xinhua on Wednesday.
Vassiliki Souladaki, deputy secretary of international relations department of the socialist PASOK party and an expert in foreign policy affairs, urged for honest dialogue between sovereign states on the basis of respecting historical facts and in accordance with international law, to put an end to the dispute.  Full story
Commentary: UNCLOS unable to solve complicated South China Sea row
BEIJING, July 1 (Xinhua) -- The United Nations Convention on the law of Sea (UNCLOS) has not resolved every past global dispute and neither will it for the South China Sea arbitration the Philippines has unilaterally initiated in The Hague.
China has elaborated on the reasons why in a position paper released in Dec. 2014. For one, the arbitration involves issues of territorial sovereignty over which UNCLOS has no jurisdiction. Hence China's non-acceptance of and non-participation in the arbitration is justified. Full story
Commentary: Manic South China Sea arbitration melting foundation of int'l order
BEIJING, June 30 (Xinhua) -- China is defending not only its territorial sovereignty but world peace and stability when fighting against the obstinacy displayed in the South China Sea arbitration.
The Arbitral Tribunal in the South China Sea arbitration, established at the unilateral request of the Republic of the Philippines, claimed on Wednesday that it would issue the final "award" on July 12.  Full story
Spotlight: Int'l experts criticize Hague arbitration tribunal over South China Sea
BEIJING, June 30 (Xinhua) -- International experts criticized an arbitral tribunal with widely contested jurisdiction for its plan to issue an award on July 12 on the South China Sea case unilaterally initiated by the Philippines.
The government of outgoing Philippine President Benigno Aquino III filed the arbitration against China in 2013, despite the agreement his country had reached with China on resolving their South China Sea disputes through bilateral negotiations.  Full story
Commentary: Ill-grounded S. China Sea arbitration to only worsen disputes among neighbors
BEIJING, June 29 (Xinhua) -- The South China Sea arbitration unilaterally initiated by the Philippines does not hold water from a legal standpoint and will not put an end to the South China Sea disputes, but only worsen them. Full story
Law-abusing tribunal to issue award on South China Sea arbitration
THE HAGUE, June 29 (Xinhua) -- An arbitral tribunal with widely contested jurisdiction will issue an award on July 12 on the South China Sea case unilaterally initiated by the Philippines, the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague said on Wednesday. Full story
Backgrounder: Timeline of Philippines' unilaterally initiated South China Sea arbitration case
BEIJING, June 29 (Xinhua) -- The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague has said on Wednesday that an arbitral tribunal with widely contested jurisdiction will issue an award on July 12 on the South China Sea case unilaterally initiated by the Philippines. Full story

