2016-07-15



 Commentary: Concrete actions from new Philippine gov't key to break ice, solve disputes




by Fei Liena
BEIJING, July 15 (Xinhua) -- To clear the waters of the South China Sea which has been muddied by the arbitration case initiated by the former Philippine government, the new government needs to take concrete actions than just nice words.
In his latest gesture to break the ice of bilateral relations with China caused by the ridiculous "award," new Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Thursday that he was asking former President Fidel Ramos to help start talks with China over disputes in the South China Sea, taking a first concrete and constructive step to really solve the disputes with China.
Since Duterte took office on June 30, he has released a series of positive signals, trying to warm up the chilly relations with China. He said he does not want to go to war with China and that he is not interested in letting his country join America's "free navigation" action.
Duterte's gestures have given people a bit of confidence that the new Philippine government is trying to clean up the mess left over by his predecessor Benigno S. Aquino III, and bring relations with China back to the right track.
The invalid arbitration over the South China Sea, along with the subsequent political manipulation and Western media hoo-ha, has set a bad example of abusing international law and brought the issue to a dangerous and confrontational situation.
The current tension does no good to the China-Philippine relations, as well as the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region. Bringing the disputes back to the right track of solution would serve the interests of both parties.
The Chinese leadership said Tuesday that China is ready to resolve disputes peacefully through negotiation and consultation with those states directly concerned. China will make every effort to seek win-win results and maintain the peace that is so vital to stability and prosperity in the region.
China and the Philippines are neighbors. The bilateral disputes are basically disagreements in the neighborhood, and can be solved through talks by the neighbors.
People expect the new Philippine government to show its sincerity with more concrete actions, and work with the Chinese side to properly manage and contain disagreements, so as to push bilateral relations back to its proper place.
Only by sealing a deal through equal negotiation among parties directly concerned can relevant disputes be fundamentally resolved, and the deal be effectively implemented.
Instead of being troubled waters, the South China Sea serves as a bridge connecting China and its neighbors. Maintaining the peace, stability and prosperity of the South China Sea is the common wish and responsibility of China and ASEAN members, and serves the interests of those countries.
As long as the parties insist on solving disagreements through negotiation and consultation and seeking win-win cooperation, the South China Sea will basically be a sea of peace and prosperity. 


