

 News Analysis: Proposal to increase U.S. military presence in the Philippines assailed, defended





By Alito L. Malinao
MANILA, Aug. 16 (Xinhua) -- The proposed agreement between Manila and Washington to increase U.S. military presence in the country by allowing American troops to use Philippine bases has been assailed and defended.
The militant Bagong Alyansang Makabayan (New Nationalist Alliance) said that the proposal could be "worse" than the military bases agreement that was terminated by the Philippines in l991.
Renato Reyes, secretary-general of the alliance, said that the new agreement if signed "will allow U.S. troops to be present all over the country. Every Philippine military facility, not just Subic and Clark, can now be accessed by U.S. troops."
Subic Naval Base in Subic, Zambales and Clark Air Base in Pampanga, both north of Manila, used to be the two largest U.S. military facilities in the region before the abrogation of the military accord with the U.S. two decades ago.
But Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert Del Rosario said increased "rotational presence" of the U.S. troops in the Philippines will ensure "the security of our people and the territorial integrity of our nation."
Del Rosario said that aside from security considerations, the expanded U.S. military presence will "vastly improve" the country' s ability to provide Filipinos and the region with timely and responsive humanitarian and disaster relief.
Del Rosario also gave the assurance that the agreement will not violate the Philippine Constitution, which among other things, bans the presence of nuclear arms in the country. A number of U.S. warships are known to carry nuclear missiles.
"Our Philippine negotiators have been given parameters that require them to ensure that our Constitution and laws are fully respected. They have been tasked to ensure that Philippine interests are preserved and promoted," he said.
The Department of Foreign Affairs is participating in the negotiations between the defense officials of the two countries. The first round was held in Manila on Monday; the second round will be held in Washington, D.C.
Del Rosario said that while the Philippines is steadfastly for peace in the region, it also stands ready "to tap every resource, to call on every alliance, to do what is necessary in order to defend what is ours, to secure our nation and to keep our people safe."
But Reyes said that more than the frequent port calls for refuelling, resupply and recreation, U.S. forces will now be allowed to preposition their weapons and equipment in Philippine military facilities.
"This means turning the entire country into a huge U.S. military base," Reyes said.
Reyes said that the Philippine government will have no control over these equipment and vehicles, citing the current Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA), which does not give the Philippines the right to inspect U.S. war materiel.
The negotiation between the Philippines and the United States over the framework agreement on the American forces' increased rotational presence in the Philippines was nothing but a " masquerade", the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) said Wednesday.
The leftist rebel group said that the talks which began on Wednesday were just to formalize what has been the U.S. practice of making use of the Philippines as a military base.
"The plan to grant the U.S. greater military access to local ports and infrastructure and to extend rights to set up its own facilities has long been agreed upon by the Aquino government and the U.S. military," said the CPP, the umbrella group of the New People's Army.
This arrangement was clinched in the Strategic Defense Dialogue held in Washington in January 2012 right after U.S. President Barack Obama declared his government's strategy to pivot toward Asia where it plans to deploy more than half of its naval forces, it said.
The CPP reiterated its position that further strengthening and expanding U.S. military presence in the Philippines violate Philippine sovereignty.
Senate President Franklin Drilon also urged Philippine negotiators to ensure that the proposed accord would be legal and constitutional.
"As a senator, it is my obligation to our people to ensure that any agreement the government will enter into is legal and in accordance with our Constitution. I will examine the outcome of the negotiations to see to it that it will not infringe on the lives of our people and their guaranteed rights," Drilon said.
Drilon said any agreement on increased American presence must be governed by the terms of the VFA and must preclude the possibility of granting permanent basing rights to foreign forces.
"The framework agreement should be in accordance with the restrictions set forth under the VFA," he said.
The VFA that allows limited American military presence in the country was signed in 1991 in lieu of a formal bases agreement.
Meanwhile, Mayor Rodrigo Duterte of Davao City in southern Philippines revealed that he has rejected a U.S government request to use the city's old airport as an operating base for its drone program.
"The U.S. government wants to use the old airport. I refused. I will not allow them to use our airport for them to launch their drones," Duterte was quoted as saying Monday by the local media.
Duterte, known for being straightforward, said that he does not want his city to be used as a base for unmanned aerial vehicles by the U.S. in its campaign against terrorism and insurgency.
"I do not want it. I do not want trouble and killings," Duterte said.
He said he told the U.S. government that there would be more bloodshed if there were drone operators in the city. "They will only add to the problem," Duterte said.
Duterte said that in 2011, he believed the U.S. was engaged in covert operations against Muslim extremists in Davao City.
 


