2016-08-21

 Xinhua China-related world news summary at 0900 GMT, Aug. 21



WASHINGTON -- Chinese President Xi Jinping's forthcoming meeting
with his U.S. counterpart Barack Obama is expected to enhance
mutual trust, widen win-win cooperation and deliver guidance for
management on differences between China and the United States.

"The upcoming meeting between the two heads of state, just as
every strategic talk they have held in recent years, will produce
very positive and important influence on China-U.S. bilateral
relations," Cui Tiankai, Chinese ambassador to the United States,
said in a joint interview with Chinese-language news media here on
Saturday. (US-Chinese Ambassador-Interview)

- - - -
LOS ANGELES -- Hao Jingfang, author of Folding Beijing, became
the second Chinese writer to take home a Hugo Award when she won a
Best Novelette award on Saturday at the 74th World Science Fiction
Convention in the United States.

"I hope the real future will be brighter than my story," the
post-80s writer, who graduated from Qinghua University's Department
of Physics in 2006, said at the 2016 Hugo Awards Ceremony held in
Kansas City Convention Center. (US-Hugo Award-Chinese)

- - - -
MANILA -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte thanked China on
Sunday for offering help in his administration's campaign against
drugs.

At a news conference in Davao City early Sunday, Duterte said
that "there are countries offering to help," but China was "the
first country to offer actually." (Philippines-China-Help)

- - - -
NAIROBI -- Chinese firm, China Wu Yi's Building
Industrialization Research, Development and Production Base and
Supermarket project will help Kenya achieve its industrial goals, a
senior government official said on Saturday.

Cabinet Secretary in the Ministry of Industry, Trade and
Cooperatives Adan Mohamed said that when the 101 million U.S.
dollar investment is completed, it will revolutionize the
construction sector. (Kenya-China-Industrialization)

- - - -
SYDNEY -- China's technology hub Silicon Dragon is slowly
becoming a force to be reckoned with as some of its tech companies
are delivering revenue growth that could give Google and Facebook a
run for its money, a columnist said.

Fairfax Media columnist Michael Smith said on Saturday the hub
based in Shenzhen near Hong Kong was its version of Silicon Valley,
adding that Australia was "dinosaurs in comparison" to the Chinese
progress in technology. (China-Australia-High Tech) Enditem


