 Philippine president threatens to "break up" with U.S.


MANILA, Oct. 4 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Tuesday that he would "eventually" cut ties with the United States.
Duterte again hit out at the United States and its president, the European Union and the United Nations for using human rights to criticize his campaign to curb the illicit drug menace in the Philippines.
"I am very emotional because America has certainly failed us," Duterte added.
"I will be re-configuring my foreign policy," Duterte said in a speech before the Jewish Association of the Philippines in Makati City.
He added, "Eventually I might in my time break up with America. I would rather go to Russia and to China. "
In another speech earlier, Duterte vowed to continue the war on drugs amidst the "hypocrisy" of the U.S., the EU and the UN.
"I will not stop despite the hypocrisy of the EU, and America and Obama. They seem to refuse to understand," Duterte said.
Duterte said he has no plan to stop his rant again his critics.
Duterte again apologized to the Jewish community. "I am not one of the racist member of this republic," he said.
"But it was only because that they pictured me to be killing so many persons of the drug problem. And I would say that it is true but not all were killed with their hands tied behind their backs. That would have been an exaggeration," he explained.
Last Sunday, Duterte apologized to the Jewish community who were outraged by his comments that made reference to Adolf Hitler who ordered the cold-blooded killings of the Jews.
"I would like to make it (clear) now, here and now, that there was never an intention on my part to derogate the memory of the six million Jews murdered," Duterte said in a speech in Bacolod City in the central Philippines.
Related:
Philippine president says to order review of defense pact with U.S.
MANILA, Oct. 2 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said Sunday that he will order a review of the 2014 Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA) between his country and the United States.
Duterte made the remarks at a local festival in Bacolod City in central Philippines. Full story 
Duterte says upcoming Philippine-U.S. joint war games will be last
MANILA, Sept. 28 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said on Wednesday that the joint war games between the United States and the Philippine marines in October will be the last.
"So I am serving notice now to the Americans. I will maintain the military alliance, the PH-U.S. pact which our countries signed in the early 50s. But I will establish new alliances for trade and commerce. I will serve notice to you now that this will be the last military exercise," Duterte said in a speech before the Filipino community in Hanoi, Vietnam where he is on an overnight working visit. Full story 

