 16th Philippine Congress ends with passage of some 30 major laws



MANILA, June 6 (Xinhua) -- The Philippine Senate and House of Representatives adjourned sine die on Monday, signaling the close of the 16th Congress.
About 30 major laws, covering the economy, justice, agriculture, workers' welfare, health, and education, were approved during the three-year 16th Congress, Senate President Franklin Drilon said.
"Our collective efforts yielded a harvest of laws that will strengthen the economy, promote social justice and transform our country into one of the strongest and fastest growing economies in the world," he said in a speech.
Through the laws enacted by the 16th Congress, he said they are giving the next Congress and the administration of incoming President Rodrigo Duterte "our present for the future."
Among the major and controversial bills that were pending for a long time and only passed in the current Congress include the Philippine Competition Act, amendment to 50-year old Cabotage Law, full entry of foreign banks in the country, Customs Modernization and Tariff Act, and creation of the Department of Information and Communications Technology.
Despite the strong lobby of the Catholic Church and tobacco firms, the present Congress also passed the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Law and the Sin Tax Reform Law, respectively.
"The 16th Congress may not be perfect," said Drilon, adding, "However, the challenge that we must face head on is to protect our gains, and ensure the continuity of reforms, so that their fruits will be enjoyed not only by this generation, but also by the generations yet unborn."
Drilon will continue to serve in the Senate as he has been reelected as a senator for another six-year term during the May 9 elections.
However, it is not sure if he could continue to remain as the Senate president when the 17th Congress opens in July.
On the other hand, House Speaker Feliciano Belmonte, who has been reelected also as a congressman in Quezon City, Metro Manila, is likely not to retain the speakership in the next Congress as Duterte has given his support to Representative-elect Pantaleon Alvarez of southern Philippine province of Davao del Norte.

