2016-07-19

 Presidential adviser Dureza hails Supreme Court's decision to free Arroyo



MANILA, July 19 (Xinhua) -- Philippine peace adviser Jesus Dureza hailed Tuesday the decision of the Supreme Court to dismiss the plunder case against former President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.
"I am elated that justice has been served with this decision," Dureza told a news conference at the Malacanang presidential palace.
Dureza, who served during the Arroyo administration, added, "I rejoice over this decision that had given her what she rightly deserves. This is justice."
He said he congratulated Arroyo on the phone on his way to the palace, saying he and his wife used to visit her in her detention room inside a hospital in the capital.
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said last May that he wants to see Arroyo walk free from her hospital detention cell. Duterte, a lawyer, said Arroyo has been detained for four years without trial.
"She deserves to be released. She has been detained for so long, the trial delayed," Duterte said at the time, adding Arroyo is a victim of slow justice.
The Philippine Supreme Court acquitted Tuesday former Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo of plunder, granting the former leader's plea to drop the case against her.
The High Court's ruling paved the way for Arroyo, 69, to walk out of the Veterans Memorial Medical Centre, where she has been detained since October 2012.
Theodore Te, a spokesman for the court, told a news conference that the Supreme Court, voting 11-4, annulled the criminal case against Arroyo for "insufficiency of evidence.' He said the court also ordered the "immediate release of the detained" former president.
Arroyo is currently a member of the Philippine House of Representatives having won the May elections for another term.
The Ombudsman filed the plunder case against Arroyo and nine other former government officials who allegedly misused some P366 million (7.8 million U.S. dollars) lottery funds of the state-run Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office from 2007 to 2010.
Arroyo is the second Philippine president to be jailed for plunder.
In 2001, ousted President Joseph Estrada was also jailed after anti-graft court convicted and sentenced him to life in prison in 2007. Estrada was later freed after Arroyo pardoned him.
Presidential Spokesperson Ernesto Abella said the Duterte administration recognizes the Supreme Court's independence and it will abide by its decision.
Arroyo's husband, former First Gentleman Jose Miguel Arroyo, welcomed the high court's ruling.
"The dawn of a new administration has brought about new hope for great positive change, which includes freedom from false and malicious accusations and unceasing lies and disinformation," he said.
Arroyo said they support the new government on its fight against criminality, corruption and its economic and political reforms that "will surely usher in new golden age for our country and people."
After serving as president for nine years until 2010, the former president ran as representative in her province. She has been reelected as congresswoman in the May polls for the third time even if under hospital arrest.
President Rodrigo Duterte earlier admitted that he offered pardon for Arroyo, which the latter declined because it would be considered as admitting on the accusation hurled against her.

